The attempt to condemn Prime Minister Narendra Modi for lowering the dignity of his office by talking about domestic corruption on his official trips abroad is unwarranted. Their argument that the PM has no business discussing domestic politics abroad is specious given that he was holding forth on efforts to clean up India’s scam-tainted image, to that of a skill-based economy with huge potential.
The world has changed a lot from the days when the focus of Indian dignitaries visiting abroad was largely the foreign audience. Today our leaders have to also reach out to millions of non-resident Indians and people of Indian origin who take a keen interest in India and can be persuaded to help promote investments and trade. A sterilised sermon will have little credibility with this huge constituency who keenly follow domestic politics through print, visual and social media.
It is time the opposition woke up to the fact that India’s electoral battles will soon be fought on a global canvas with the Election Commission deciding to confer voting rights on NRIs. India’s liberal democracy will ensure a sanitised version of India for a gullible foreign audience will soon be history. Finance minister Arun Jaitley’s point that there are no gag orders on the PM is equally applicable to opposition leaders in this changing context.
Counterview
Rise above partisan politics
Sanjiv Shankaran
Convention says that when prime ministers make state visits abroad, they leave domestic politics behind. It’s a healthy tradition as a prime minister is travelling to represent India and not a political party. So it was disappointing that Prime Minister Modi chose to take potshots at UPA during his recent visit to Germany and Canada. That is acceptable during an election campaign or the cut and thrust of a parliamentary debate. On a state visit, it is not statesmanlike.
For sure, there is no gag order on a prime minister choosing to bring up domestic issues on a state visit abroad. However, the absence of formal rules prohibiting it does not automatically mean it was acceptable. Proper conduct is not guided merely by formal rules. Conventions and common sense also play an important part in guiding conduct, particularly in the case of leaders. Leaders in all walks of life represent not just personal interests, but also interests of larger groups. Therefore, the standard expected of leaders is higher than what one would expect of others.
The choices Prime Minister Modi makes on a state visit embody that of the head of a government. Given this context, he should avoid comments that suggest political partisanship. There are other occasions for it. Conventions ought not to be dismissed in an offhand way as they serve a useful purpose.