NEW DELHI:  Amid increasing Chinese influence in the Indian Ocean Rim, the government today asserted that the strategic region was "critical" for India's economic growth and it will ensure that "our littorals" are not used in a manner which is detrimental to national interests.

Noting that India's location and the strategic importance of IOR in the 21st Century cannot be over-emphasised, Minister of State (MoS) for Defence Rao Inderjit Singh, said the sea lines passing through the Indian Ocean Rim are critical for the country's economic growth.

"Numerous nations depend on the waters of the Indian Ocean for trade and energy supplies. It is therefore our duty to ensure that our littorals are not used in a manner prejudicial to our interests," he said in his address at a naval seminar in the national capital.
RELATED
Jaitley Drops Plans to Strip RBI of Powers to Regulate Government Bonds
Set Up Monthly Stress Tests: Sebi to Asset Managers
Key Facts About the Nepal Earthquake

Assuring full support to Indian Navy's modernisation plan, he said the national interest was to ensure a secure and stable environment to enable continued economic development and social upliftment.

China has been increasing its activities in the Indian Ocean region, a move which has raised eyebrows in the Indian security and defence apparatus.

In a written reply to Rajya Sabha on Tuesday, Defence Minister Manohar Parrikar had said the government is aware of Chinese participation in development projects in the strategically-important Indian Ocean region.

He had added that the government keeps a constant watch on all developments concerning India's national security.

The Chinese Navy had late last year docked its two submarines in a Sri Lanka port, an issue that was immediately taken by the government with Lankan authorities.

The India Ocean and the Pacific waters are strategically very important. The US too has decided to "rebalance" to this region.

The US plans to have six aircraft carrier and about 200 ships by 2020 in these two oceans.

Meanwhile, Mr Singh highlighted the role of the Indian Navy along with the Coast Guard in ensuring the safety and security of the seas in the maritime areas of interest.