Back in 2008, Chelsea Clinton was still something of an enigma. She had never given a single major interview. After some of the things said about growing up in the White House – Rush Limbaugh notoriously compared her to a dog and Senator John McCain made a comment too offensive to merit repeating – she was naturally wary about public exposure.

At one campaign stop in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, she was asked a question about her parents by Sydney Rieckhoff, a reporter for the education magazine Scholastic News. Rieckhoff was no ordinary reporter – she was nine years old and in the fourth grade. Yet when she pitched her question in a squeaky kid’s voice, Clinton replied: “I’m sorry, I don’t talk to the press. And that applies to you, unfortunately. Even though I think you’re cute.”

That was then. In the intervening years, Clinton has shed her publicity-adverse outer skin, giving interviews to major publications like Vogue and appearing on stage with Stella McCartney, taking up a temporary job as an NBC News correspondent and turning up on late-night talk shows.

Hillary and Chelsea in 1998 Facebook Twitter Pinterest
 First lady Hillary Rodham Clinton and daughter Chelsea in June 1998. Photograph: Greg Gibson/AP
Chelsea has also worked hard – very hard – at piling on public-service credentials, in the Clinton family fashion. Last May she acquired a doctorate in international global governance from Oxford. Concurrently, she has risen up her parents’ philanthropic business to become an equal partner in what is now called the Bill, Hillary & Chelsea Clinton Foundation.

Advertisement

She frames her ambitions as wanting to lead a “purposefully public life”, raising inevitable questions about her own ambitions for political office. In stark contrast to the many years she spent shunning such queries, she has begun to respond with an unforced openness inconceivable a few years ago – and with linguistic jujitsu handed down from her tantalisingly evasive parents. Yes, Chelsea has said on more than one occasion, it is possible that “at some point” she might decide to run herself.

“She’s at a different stage in her life now – she’s a fully formed adult, she knows her place in the world. She will be a visible and important surrogate to Hillary Clinton,” said Debbie Walsh, director of the Center for American Women and Politics at Rutgers University.

No baggage, no ceilings
Last time on the presidential campaign trail, Chelsea travelled hundreds of thousands of miles, visiting more than 100 colleges and universities across more than 30 states in an attempt to draw young professionals away from the charismatic Obama and toward her mother’s camp. Though now 35 years old, the youngest Clinton – her six-month-old daughter, Charlotte, is officially a Mezvinsky – is expected to continue zeroing in on the 18-29 demographic from the campaign’s launch well into next year.

Pollsters have already said of Hillary Clinton’s challenges heading into the general election, assuming she wins the Democratic nomination this time, will be to persuade young voters to stick with her at the stratospheric levels achieved by Obama in both his contests: he attracted 66% of the youth vote in 2008 and 67% in 2012). Winning over so-called millennials is expected to become even more of a focus with her likely Republican opposition already casting votes for Hillary Clinton as votes for the past.

Bill and Chelsea watch Hillary Facebook Twitter Pinterest
 Bill and Chelsea Clinton watch Hillary Clinton campaign in 2008. Photograph: Joe Raedle/Getty Images
“Chelsea brings a fresh face to the Clintons,” said Parnes. “While her parents evoke both positive and negative emotions, she is the one who doesn’t bring her own baggage to the campaign.”

Chelsea’s other appeal to her mother’s team – now led by fellow 35-year-old Robby Mook – is that she falls directly into a second critical target demographic: young, professional women. In 2008, Hillary Clinton avoided making gender an outright political issue for her cause, putting emphasis on her dependability instead and, in conceding to Obama, saying she had made “18 million cracks” in “that highest, hardest glass ceiling”.

But the Clinton family has already made it clear that women will be front and center this time around: shattering that ceiling to become the first female president will be a definitive selling point to the American people.

The mother-and-daughter pair have been forging a veritable double-act on women’s issues in recent months. As the controversy over the family’s use of a private email server bubbled up last month, Hillary and Chelsea joined Melinda Gates in New York to promote No Ceilings, a campaign for the full participation of women in political and public life.

Chelsea’s public remarks on behalf the foundation, too, have increasingly honed in on what she calls “empowering women and girls” – a theme primed for a stump speech in early battleground states like Iowa and New Hampshire.