There are land mines, of course. Should Chelsea take on a prominent, even pre-eminent role in the 2016 Clinton campaign, the family risks further highlighting that they represent a dynasty – an exalted status as Democratic royalty that could alienate voters who already distrust what they see as a Clintonian sense of entitlement.

Chelsea Clinton could face the same accusations her mother has long endured: mudslinging about an extremely wealthy individual claiming to stand up for struggling middle-class families. Hillary, now summoning talking points on the inequality debate from some 200 economic minds, ran into trouble during her book tour last year when she talked about the Clintons being “dead broke” after they left the White House.

The family is not “truly well off”, Hillary Clinton told the Guardian in June.

Chelsea has taken in plenty of snarky criticism herself over a Clinton wealth gap, mostly having to do with her $11m home in Manhattan, the $600,000 she was being paid by NBC until last summer for largely softball interview segments, and the $75,000 she now reportedly commands for each public speaking engagement. (She insists all the money goes to the Clinton Foundation.)

In an interview that same June, she said: “I was curious if I could care about [money] on some fundamental level, and I couldn’t.” That didn’t help the dynastic aura of even the most well-intentioned Clinton.

But as her mother’s team puts the finishing touches on a formal campaign launch – its lease on an office space in Brooklyn may have started a 15-day countdown on Friday – they are likely to conclude the upsides of Chelsea vastly outweigh any possible glitches.

In some ways Chelsea Clinton’s whole life has been training for this moment. As she likes to tell audiences, her parents debated with her at the dinner table from the time she was four – expecting her to have firm opinions that she could defend. There will be plenty of that in the run-up to November 2016.

The third generation of Clintons
Chelsea Clinton Facebook Twitter Pinterest
 Chelsea Clinton speaks with former US secretary of state Madeleine Albright during a meeting of the Clinton Global Initiative in 2011. Photograph: Daniel Berehulak/Getty Images
Now Chelsea is a mother in her own right, after giving birth in September. The arrival of a third Clinton generation offers a projection of Hillary-as-devoted-grandmother. That image is gold-dust to campaign image-makers who struggled in 2008 against a perception of the candidate as cold, distant and calculating – conclusions already being drawn by the rightwing media and a growing army of Republican opponents.

“There’s a narrative about Hillary Clinton that she’s not like you, she’s not warm and friendly, she’s not Bill Clinton,” Walsh said. “She suffered from that early on in her first campaign and it’s going to be incredibly important to bring out her human qualities, to humanize her.”

Chelsea Clinton wedding Facebook Twitter Pinterest
 Chelsea Clinton at her wedding ceremony with Marc Mezvinsky in July 2010. Photograph: Genevieve de Manio/AFP/Getty Images
Research commissioned by the Barbara Lee Family Foundation, which seeks to advance the electoral prospects of female candidates, has found that a double bind still exists. While male politicians can attract voters’ support by appearing strong and decisive, even when they are not perceived as being particularly likeable, women still have to prove to the world they are both qualified for office and likeable.

“Voters are perfectly willing to vote for a male executive they think is qualified but do not like. However, they will not vote for a woman they find unlikeable even if she is qualified,” the researchers concluded.

That’s another mountain that Hillary Clinton must climb. The comfort is that she will have Chelsea right beside her.

Amie Parnes expects to see the former secretary leaning on her daughter – as well as infant Charlotte – as very public examples of why she’s running: “You already hear her talking about her granddaughter and I’d expect much more of that. I’m sure we’ll hear something about how she hopes by the time her granddaughter is grown that she’ll experience equal pay.”

Debbie Walsh predicts that, together, Hillary and Chelsea will sound a clarion call for women’s equality on the trail wholly unlike anything heard in 2008. “This time there will be less holding back, less uncertainty. The Clintons have learned that when they embrace women, children and families, they are both more effective and more authentic.”