Congress vice-president Rahul Gandhi seems to be finding his voice, if not his political feet yet. He’s back in the arena swinging and his frontal, uncharacteristically bold attack on the prime minister – claiming Modi is only on a visit to India and Make in India has no space for the kisan – is a clear attempt to take the battle right to the heart of the NDA government.
His media management has become more adroit too as yesterday’s morning news was dominated by visuals of his general class train travel to Punjab, and the afternoon was taken over by his outburst in Parliament. Last week, Rahul’s “suit boot ki sarkar” comment was a populist metaphor for a government he is seeking to portray as “pro-corporate and anti-farmer”.
Through Rahul’s new avatar, Congress has given notice that it is determined to do to BJP what BJP had done to UPA during the latter’s years in power – obstruct every move of government through a brand of negative, populist politics. However, Rahul’s fiery interventions must be viewed with some scepticism. In the past he has shown the tendency to shoot and scoot, one day in Bhatta Parsaul, the next day on long leave of absence. His recent 56 day sabbatical has only added to cynical perceptions and led to doubts about whether he really has the stomach for the big fight. Moreover the rhetoric he deploys is that of the old, Indira Gandhi-style left wing politics of four decades ago – it remains to be seen whether this will cut much ice in 21st century, aspirational India.
Yet the Modi government would be mistaken if it were to ignore the challenge being posed by the newly energised Congress heir apparent. Agricultural growth has fallen to 1% in the last year even as unseasonal rains have aggravated agrarian distress. The kisan may not vote on sharp one-liners but is clearly seeking empathy from the political leadership. The real question is whether Rahul can sustain his campaign, which already has a jaded feel to it, and stay the course. Even better would be if he can convert his newfound energy into articulating an agenda for a modern agriculture and a revitalised industry, going beyond a vision of endless doles and handouts from a mai-baap sarkar.