The land acquisition law passed by the UPA government in 2013, then supported by the BJP, is now the whipping boy of the Narendra Modi regime. It blames the law for slowing down growth by stalling projects. However, on Tuesday, this newspaper reported startling results, from a right-to-information (RTI) query that blows the lid off this claim. Of a total 804 stalled projects, a mere 8% were affected by problems in acquiring land. The biggest reason why projects got stuck was ‘unfavourable’ market conditions, followed by lack of clearances unrelated to the environment, and dwindling promoter interest. Further, most of the projects that are stalled because of land issues have little to do with social betterment. Most were related to building luxury hotels, malls, multiplexes, golf courses and so on.

This data has several implications. One, obviously, is that it makes no sense, now that the numbers are clear, for the BJP to blame the land law for the slowdown — and dilute it. Drop the idea and move on to more important things. Two, the new government has failed to stir babudom of its risk-averse paralysis. Three, promoters who bid for projects were most likely unprepared or undercapitalised to execute the job at hand, and it was inevitable that they would fail, and look for excuses like land acquisition to hide their own culpability.
One of India’s worst-kept secrets is that many promoters took up projects without having adequate equity to fund them. They borrowed heavily from mostly state-owned banks and are now squirming under a mountain of debt. The collusion between promoters, bankers and their bureaucratic and political masters has taken a terrible toll. It has weakened bank balance sheets, left projects in the lurch and put the brakes on the economy. Lenders should act decisively, throw out existing managements, restructure finances and get professionals to execute stalled projects. But to create that momentum, we must reform campaign finance, which works through extensive networks of patronage, graft and cash transactions.

, Home Minister Rajnath Singh said today.

"India will never provoke a conflict by being the first to open fire across the borders but will never back off...," he said. "Our forces will give a befitting reply to shelling and gunfire from across the border."

The Minister was speaking at the inauguration of the Border Security Force (BSF) Golden Jubilee seminar.

RELATED
Nawaz Sharif Calls PM Modi, Condoles Loss of Lives in Earthquake
Little India Riot Case: Prosecution Alleges Accused of Lying
Microsoft Lumia 430 Dual SIM Is the Most Affordable Lumia Yet
Mr Singh said secured borders were integral to India's development and the BSF was doing a "wonderful job not only in guarding the land borders but is also taking care of the riverine and coastal borders along Bangladesh and Gujarat".

The government has sanctioned six Floating Border Out-Posts (BOPs) for the Bangladesh border and three for Gujarat, he said.

Saying the government would provide the BSF the latest weaponry and other equipment, the minister lauded the BSF personnel for undertaking welfare activities in border areas.