It is tempting to sympathise with the home ministry in its ongoing tussle with the finance ministry over scrapping allocations for some vital pan-India schemes relating to internal security. But one should not. Schemes, such as Special Infrastructure Schemes for Naxal-hit areas and the Crime and Criminal Tracking Network and Systems, are no longer centrally funded. The question is, can these schemes be implemented by the states’ willing cooperation, in the absence of the lure of central funding? These are schemes that are centrally designed, meant to be rolled out uniformly in all the states and coordinated by the Centre. With no central funding, states have to fund them from their own resources. Their priorities could tell them to go slow on these schemes. Or they might choose a design of their own, scuppering nationwide uniformity. What then?
State governments can be persuaded to act in a particular fashion, if their political commitment can be secured for the cause. Or their cooperation can be purchased, by offering them central funds, available only on the Centre’s terms. It is certainly easier to buy federal cooperation. But political commitment is sturdier, even if harder to obtain. To secure political buyin from the states, either or both of two things can be done. One, you can saturate public consciousness with the national importance of, say, creating a central database of criminals that any police station can tap into, so as to make it difficult for a state-level leader to dump it. Two, the central leadership can engage with the state-level leadership and find mutual accommodation on a range of things.
Financial incentives work at the level of civil servants. Political messaging and accommodation are at the political level. To insist that internal security will suffer without old-style central funding is to admit political incompetence on the twin arts of engaging the public and finding a common ground with rivals. Why take incompetence for granted? Forums such as the Niti Aayog and the Inter-State Council can produce federal convergence.