Trinamool Congress’s sweeping victory in civic polls to the Kolkata Municipal Corporation (KMC) and 91 other municipalities across Bengal reaffirms the ruling party’s dominant position in the state. The polls were touted as the semifinal before the 2016 assembly elections and represented a real test of Trinamool’s popularity, especially after the Saradha chit fund scam. Conversely, they also provided an opportunity to see if the Left had recovered any ground or if BJP had made significant inroads into Bengal’s electorate. However, by winning 115 out of 144 KMC wards and 75 out of 91 state-wide municipal corporations, Trinamool has steamrolled the opposition.
Doubts have been cast on the fairness of the poll, held under the aegis of the state election commission, with several incidents of violence and hundreds of malpractice complaints. Trinamool has been accused of booth capturing, intimidation and fraud. Both BJP and the Left have called for a bandh tomorrow to protest the ruling party’s strong arm tactics. Such tactics are all the more reprehensible as the scale of the victory indicates Trinamool would have won anyway.
Trinamool’s victory can also be attributed to good work done at the corporation level, especially in Kolkata, leading to perceptible improvements in cleanliness and infrastructure. This stood out especially against the record of the Left which, following its egalitarian ideology, largely ignored Bengal’s urban centres. That strategy backfired as even rural hamlets need functional cities to prosper. Amit Shah needs to take note of BJP’s singularly lacklustre performance. BJP’s campaign was marred by infighting and the lack of a strong Bengali-speaking state leader. If BJP is to put up a good performance in 2016, it must work hard on developing its local credibility. A Haryana strategy won’t work in Bengal.

NEW DELHI:  Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) president Amit Shah said on Thursday that the BJP was now the world's largest political party with 10 crore new members.

"I take both pride and pleasure in informing that the BJP has become the world's largest political party. We had kept a target of crossing the 10-crore mark and we achieved it," Mr Shah told the media in Delhi.

RELATED
US Government Report Critical of 'Ghar Wapsi' Campaign
Prime Minister Narendra Modi to Launch Insurance, Pension Schemes on May 9
Karnataka Chief Minister Leads All-Party Delegation to PM Modi Over Mekedatu Dam Issue
"From Arunachal Pradesh to Gujarat and from Kargil to Kanyakumari, our party workers put in hard work to make our membership drive successful," he said.

He asserted that the BJP was among the few parties that practised internal democracy and conducted organisational polls in a time-bound manner.

"There are around 1,600 parties in our democracy, out of which only a few have internal democracy... BJP is among them in which internal democracy is still alive," he added.

Launched by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on November 1 last year, the countrywide membership drive notched up over 10 crore and 43 lakh members till April 30.

The BJP introduced a high-tech platform for people to become its member through the party's online or mobile phone programme.