Politics over farmer distress is not new but this time and, perhaps, in a long time, the battlelines are shaping in a way that question settled ideological assumptions about Indian politics. Left leaning state doit-all socialist approach has made a strong re-entry, demonstrating the farmer’s cause as a shining example of ‘pro-rich’ government’s antipathy. Does India’s first genuine rightof-centre government have a credible answer or will it resort to more populism to beat the charge?
In a way, beyond the obvious politics, it’s the ideological underpinnings of this challenge that will test Modi, both as a leader and politician. The Congress has for years exploited the centrist space with considerable tact, always giving itself the opportunity to move either way depending on political requirements of the day. So, if Rahul Gandhi reeled out MSP figures from the UPA era to challenge the paltry raise by the Modi government during what was arguably his best performance in Parliament so far, few asked the inconvenient question of how NREGA had offset those gains by raising labour costs in the farm sector. In a bad season, like the present one, this is bound to pinch.
Similarly, it was no surprise that the first political question raised after the tragic death of Gajendra Singh at an Aam Aadmi Party rally was what happens to Modi’s Land Acquisition Bill? Coming, as the incident did, in the backdrop of reforged Janata Parivar’s call to unite farmers and the Congress onslaught led by a rejuvenated Rahul Gandhi, it has only hastened political realignment around this sensitive issue and, thereby, presenting the first clear challenge to Modi.
As a defined approach to the social sector as a whole, the government has consciously avoided new doleout schemes. It has accepted the utility of Aadhar in its attempt to streamline the subsidy regime and has sought to locate finances behind skilling missions as part of a larger policy call that employment can only be met by an urbanizing, manufacturing-based economy and not by the rural sector. It has opted for market-linked social security schemes, which appear practical and, perhaps, financially wise. While making all of this work will be an arduous task, what’s clear is that Modi has in the past year managed to occupy the right-of-the centre space, snatching away the latitude Congress always counted as its own.
But how does he react now? More so, in the face of a groundswell that threatens to sink his government’s Land Acquisition Bill even though it has no direct link to the current crisis. This is where Modi’s political commitment to his own ideological frame will be tested. And that will be a two-pronged challenge because the political right, of which he is a product, has its own inward approach to economic policymaking and are invested strongly in these constituencies through formidable pressure groups. So, is a balancing act possible? Maybe so within the Sangh Parivar but a sharpening political divide on the outside is bound to play into the BJP’s internal political discourse, a complication the government would like to pre-empt.
In other words, the space for consensus is shrinking and along with it, the chance to find amicable political resolutions to issues like the Land Acquisition Bill. At one level, the government can hope to strike deals in Parliament and move its agenda bit-by-bit, but that would mean a lower strike rate, somewhat like the UPA strategy under Manmohan Singh — a parallel Modi would surely want to avoid.
Which is why staying the course may just be the best option for Modi.
However, it’s one thing to articulate policy, quite another to pursue it whatever the political cost, based on a conviction that India’s first right-of-the-centre government has better answers for poverty and rural distress than Congress-style Left leaning politics ever did. And that, in a nutshell, is the test Modi has signed up to.