24th April has always been a special day for Indian cricket fans, as on this day, Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar, one of cricket's greatest legends, was born. With more than 15,000 Test runs, and over 18,000 ODI runs, it is but obvious that some of Tendulkar's knocks are bound to go unnoticed. His 65 vs West Indies at Port of Spain in the 5th and final ODI was one such inning.
With the 5-match series tied at 1-1, the fifth and final ODI was a must-win game for both sides. The pressure was more on Team India as they had lost the Test series 1-2.
The Little Maestro had to sit out of the fourth ODI due to a shoulder injury. His shoulder was not 100% fit for the crunch game either, but the Maestro realized the importance of the match, and played with an injured shoulder.
He batted at the unusual fourth position in the line-up, and came in to bat after a solid foundation by the top order. The moment Tendulkar came in, he started nudging the ball around for singles and twos. He was taking quick singles and was looking to time the ball rather than hitting it hard.
A genius is nothing if not adaptable to different situations, and that day Sachin showed everyone -- sans any frills or fireworks -- that he was every bit the genius that the world knew him to be. Sachin used his wrists, and deft touches, and found gaps to scamper for quick runs. His running between the wickets was also very smart. He looked a completely different player altogether as he was not the strokeful batsman the world knew.
There were only three fours and a six punctuating his 65-run knock which came off just 70 balls. Despite an injured shoulder which restricted him to play his aggressive free-flowing strokes the master scored at a brisk strike rate of 92.85.
This knock speaks volumes about the ability of the great man who played for the side despite his injury and altered his game for the team's cause. This inning was not a typical swashbuckling Sachin Tendulkar knock and this could well be the reason why it went unnoticed in his list of many achievements.
Sachin's gritty and gutsy knock helped India pile up a competitive 260, and the 56 run win helped Team India clinch the match, and with it an ODI series win in the Caribbean. This was one of Sachin Tendulkar's performances with the bat which did earn him a man-of-the-match award but there are not many who can actually recall it.

Isn't it strange? Mahendra Singh Dhoni, a man who once walked the entire Indian team into a press conference to end speculation about a rift in the team, is now remaining silent about rumours suggesting that something untoward led to his Test retirement.
Personally, I am aghast at the thought of such rumours. The thought that the man who led India to the T20 World Cup and the 2011 ICC World Cup would quit because 'all was not hunky dory' in the Indian dressing room is just an embarrassing idea devoid of intellect.
But why would 'Captain Cool' be so cool as to not even calmly say 'Hey, all good, just need a break from playing in boring whites'?
Silence truly is golden, but this is India. This is about the captain of the Indian cricket team, a position considered second only to the Prime Ministership. A captain who is celebrated like a God at least in two states (Jharkhand and Tamil Nadu). Surely, he can be 'uncool' for 30 seconds and give us journalists something to stop writing about!
In June 2009, MS Dhoni with Virender Sehwag and the rest of the Indian team by his side, marched into the Trent Bridge press conference to showcase the unity of the team. In contrast, at his final press conference in Test Cricket, Dhoni didn't even give an inkling that half-an-hour later he was going to retire.
When asked if Dhoni owed it to the Indian fan to explain his sudden decision, former India skipper Sunil Gavaskar said, "Well I think it's a bit difficult because yes the team would be wanting to know why he quit with one Test match left and retired from the game altogether. You know that surprised everybody I think. May be even the members of the team in Australia that might have come as a bolt from the blue for them as well but at the end of the day it's a personal decision and if he feels like giving up with the reasons why he felt that he had to retire from the game, he should but if he doesn't feel like I wouldn't push him to do it."
Today, rumours like 'Is Dhoni feeling threatened by Virat Kohli?', 'Ravi Shastri-Kohli' proximity behind Dhoni's retirement' are probably so bizarre that Dhoni doesn't even feel the need to respond to it.
One must understand that we as a cricket nation get swayed by rumours. It is one thing to have knowledge and one thing to have wisdom. For now, all that a cricket enthusiast has is rumours. Rumours that develop into unverified truths once they are part of a grapevine.
I have heard many fans say 'Dhoni retired because he knew Kohli had stamped his authority' or 'Dhoni retired because of a fight in the dressing room'. This is a country where majority of us are still illiterate. So much so that, few have the sense to reason with the merit of a developing rumour.
The herd mentality is overshadowing and denting the real class of Dhoni and I don't like it. Does he? I don't think so and that's probably why he won't speak out. But could he for the sake of the average, easily swayed, uninformed, gossip mongerer who may just have the audacity to tell a reasonable journalist like yours truly, 'hey dude Dhoni hasn't denied any of it, there is no smoke without fire'?