Antagonized Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) president-in exile, N Srinivasan, on Friday, issued an unconditional apology to the Supreme Court of India for chairing BCCI's working committee meeting on February 8th after the country's top court of justice made it clear on Monday that it was not happy with Srinivasan defying court orders.

In a landmark judgement passed in late January, the Supreme Court had ordered Srinivasan, BCCI President-in exile, to stay away from the workings of the board until he was cleared of the 'conflict of interest' charges. "He (Srinivasan) might have done great service to the game. But after our judgement his position is vulnerable," the court had said on Monday.

While tendering the apology, Srinivasan's counsel, Kapil Sibal also told the Supreme Court that the his client would not participate in the BCCI Annual General Meeting (AGM) scheduled for March 2 where Srinivasan was originally scheduled to seek re-election to his presidential post. However, Srinivasan may still attend the meeting and cast his vote in the elections as a member. He is currently the president of Tamil Nadu Cricket Association, a position he has used to chair recent meetings.

After Friday's court proceedings, Srinivasan's position as BCCI President - he was in exile during the hearing of the spot-fixing case - effectively comes to a close. It is not clear whether he would nominate a proxy President to contest the elections on his behalf. According to reports, Sanjay Patel, BCCI secretary and a close aid of Srinvasan's, could file his nominations for the post of President. Other names like that of former President Jagmohan Dalmiya and vice-president Rajeev Shukla have also been thrown into the hat. The fact that it's the turn of East Zone to elect the next president strengthens Dalmiya's chances.

With two day's of politicking left before the crucial elections, the jostle for positions has already started. The Sharad Pawar-led rival camp, who requested the Prime Minister of India's intervention in the BCCI elections on Thursday, have reportedly convinced Pawar to represent the Mumbai Cricket Association in the BCCI AGM with an official confirmation of the same supposedly having already been sent to the board.
Without mentioning any individual names, former India skipper and Rajasthan Royals' mentor Rahul Dravid has come out in full support of the Board of Control for Cricket in India's (BCCI) move to eradicate 'chuckers' from the Indian Premier League (IPL).

Dravid, during an interaction with reporters on Thursday, said this decision of eradicating bowlers with 'dodgy' bowling actions should send a big message to everyone involved with cricket at the grassroots level. Dravid felt the coaches will now take corrective measures so that the bowler rectifies an flaws in his action at an early phase of his cricketing life.

"I don't want to focus on individuals. But I do support BCCI and ICC (International Cricket Council) in eradicating bowlers with dodgy actions," said Dravid.

He was reacting to a question on BCCI's ban in bowling off spinners on Sunil Narine in matches conducted by it including the IPL in which the West Indian plays for Kolkata Knight Riders."I support it for a variety of reasons. People talk about these bowlers getting punished, but what about batsmen who face them and whose careers get ruined? What about other bowlers who have clean actions but are sidelined in favour of these bowlers and are then lost to the game," asked Dravid.

Dravid said this issue needs to be addressed seriously at the junior and schools level by the players' coaches."We all can see this particular bowler has a different action, a dodgy action. What's to be done about it? You have to correct him at the junior level. The message has to percolate to the grassroots level of the game."

"There was a time in Indian domestic cricket there were so many bowlers with dodgy action. It's good that they have now decided to eradicate it. I welcome it," said Dravid.

Dravid said he cannot comment on news reports tying him to an advisory job with the Indian team as he is yet to hear anything of this nature from the BCCI."I have read it in the newspapers. I can't comment on it as I don't know anything on the issue."

The BCCI, at its working committee meeting, had authorised president Jagmohan Dalmiya to constitute a cricket advisory committee comprising prominent cricketers who will share their recommendations on the overall conduct and development of the game.Dravid's name, along with those of his erstwhile India teammates Sachin Tendulkar and Saurav Ganguly, were mentioned in some reports as those who would be inducted into the panel.