Pakistan were never earmarked as the favourites for ICC Cricket World Cup 2015 glory. They had the players, and more importantly the penchant for pulling off the unexpected on a regular basis, but it was always going to be a big ask for them to win cricket's most prized limited-overs trophy. So, the final result was not a surprising one. Disappointing, yes, but not surprising. 

As has been in the case over the years, Pakistan refused to go down when the odds were heavily stacked against them, and were blown away when the expectations were for them blow out. They were pummelled against India, failing to beat their arch-rivals on the biggest stage for the seventh time in 50-over World Cups. They suffered further ignominy when they crumbled like a used ATM reciept against West Indies in their next game. However, Misbah's side made a storming comeback with four back-to-back wins, the best of the lot coming against the mighty South Africans. 

They ran into a red-hot Australian side in the quarter-final having finished fourth in their group, and succumbed to a 6-wicket win. The loss also marked the end of an era for Pakistan in ODIs as two of their most experienced players - Misbah-ul-Haq and Shahid Afridi - called it quits after their defeat to the eventual World Champions.

Record in the WC - Played 7, won 4, lost 3

High point - Without doubt, their convincing win against AB de Villiers' side. Pakistan had come a cropper when they faced the big sides in the tournament. India routed them by 76 runs first, while West Indies pulled in an all-round effort to hand them their second straight loss. Pakistan managed to win against Zimbabwe and the United Arab Emirates but their biggest test would come against South Africa. They passed the test in the best way possible. A 29-run win against the World Cup favourites helped Pakistan dream of an encore of 1992.

Low point - Nothing will hurt Pakistan more than their loss against India. The match was pepped up big time and was the most anticipated game of the World Cup. Mauka Mauka did the rounds three gazillion times and when the chance arose, Pakistan turned in a disappointing display. Led by the man rivals love to hate, Virat Kohli and Mohd Shami, India beat their biggest rivals by 76 runs and the only way for Pakistan to erase that disappointment would have been by going on to clinch the cup. Alas, it wasn't to be.

Captaincy verdict - There's only that much one can do. Misbah-ul-Haq did everything within his powers to make the Pakistan team play twice as competitively as they actually are. With injuries or faulty actions ruling out key players like Umar Gul, Mohd Hafeez and Saeed Ajmal, Misbah had with him a severely-depleted team. But, the Pak captain got them to punch above their weight. He did his job, too - He was the only Pakistan player to feature in the top-10 run-makers list. But, there's only that much one can do.

Most valuable player - For all the reasons mentioned above - Misbah-ul-Haq

Major disappointment - Rewind to the 2011 World Cup, and one of the most common images would be that of Shahid Afridi striking his signature pose after taking a wicket. The Pakistan allrounder had wreaked havoc and ended the tournament with 21 wickets (8 games), the joint-highest along with Zaheer Khan (9 games). If Pakistan were to recreate some of the magic they did in 2011, Afridi had to play a major part. That he finished with 116 runs at an average of 23.2 and took two wickets for 282 runs tells you all you need to know about Afridi stunningly-dismal show in WC 2015.

Verdict - Typically Pakistan. They had their moments in the World Cup, and they certainly made the tournament richer by taking part in it. It was a pity that bowlers like Wahab Riaz and batsmen like Sarfraz Ahmed had to end their contribution in the WC at just the quarters, but Pakistan never looked like the side that could go on and win the WC.