South Africa's campaign ended in a heartbreaking manner against New Zealand in the first semifinal. For many, it was South Africa's best chance to win their maiden Trophy in recent years but the team failed to live up to its reputation. In the league stage, after losing to India and Pakistan, they registered three successive wins before demolishing Sri Lanka in the quarter-finals. And when they set New Zealand 298 to win in 43 overs in the semis at Auckland, it looked like they were on course for their maiden final appearance. However, it didn't transpire that way and thanks to several blunders in the field, once again their trophy dream went up the spout.

World Cup performance: Played 8, Won 5, Lost 3.

High point

Beating Sri Lanka in the quarter-finals was South Africa's best moment. Both teams went into the game on an equal footing but seven wickets between Imran Tahir and JP Duminy, who became the first Proteas player to take a World Cup hat-trick, made it a one-sided contest in favour of the South African team. Chasing 134 to win, AB de Villiers' men took just 18 overs and stormed to the semis.

Low point

If the 130-run defeat against defending champions India was embarrassing, the defeat to a weak Pakistan was a big slap in the face for the South African team. Chasing 223 to win at Auckland's Eden Park, the Proteas were bowled out for 202 despite de Villiers' 77. For a team that came into the tournament as one of the favourites, the defeats, especially the one against Pakistan, were nothing less than shocking - to say the least.

Captaincy verdict

De Villiers left his mark with the bat but his captaincy left a lot to be desired. While there is no denying that the whole team management makes decisions on selection matters, de Villiers can't be exonerated from the blame of dropping Kyle Abbott, who did well against Sri Lanka in the quarterfinal, against New Zealand and bringing in Vernon Philander after an absence of two matches due to a hamstring injury. Philander's ineffectual bowling (8-0-52-0) went a long way towards the Proteas' failure to defend 298 in 43 overs.

Most valuable player

De Villiers the batsman once again made waves at a big stage by scoring 482 runs at an astounding average of 96.40 and strike rate of 144.31. His 162* off 66 balls against West Indies was a tutelage in assault. He also tried his hand at bowling and took four wickets. The 31-year-old was a live wire in the field too. However, ironically he failed to run out Corey Anderson in the semis, an opportunity that cost the South African team dear.

Major disappointment

Quinton de Kock's had a horror of a tournament in terms of batting. Apart from 78 not out against Sri Lanka in a match where they were chasing a lowly 134 to win, the wicketkeeper-batsman had a horrid outing. The rest of his scores were 7, 7, 12, 1, 0, 26, 14 and they sum up his batting travails. De Kock's fellow opener Hashim Amla too had a poor tournament by his own standards with scores of 11, 22, 65, 159, 38, 12, 16 and 10.

Verdict: South Africa didn't play to their potential. Their only big win came against Sri Lanka in the quarters and that says a great deal about their campaign. Some big names like Amla, de Kock, Dale Steyn failed to show up at crucial moments and let the team down. The Proteas now will have to wait another four years before they can think of breaking the World Cup jinx once again.