Perennial underdogs. The underachievers in World Cups. Flattering to deceive. This was New Zealand, in a nutshell, when it came to cricket during the World Cup. 2015 changed that totally. From underdogs, Brendon McCullum's team transformed themselves into World beaters and almost came to the cusp of greatness. However, it was a bridge too far and Australia shattered their dream by clinically demolishing them in the final. Along the way, New Zealand played a brand of cricket that made them the most loved team in the tournament. From McCullum's belligerence to the emergence of Trent Boult as the next best thing, this has been the greatest period for New Zealand.

Record in the World Cup - Played 9, Won 8, Lost 1

High Points

There were plenty of positives in both the batting and bowling in this tournament. Right from the first match, individuals stood up and contributed at vital times. Tim Southee blew England away in Wellington with 7 for 33 while Trent Boult ran through Australia with 5 for 27. Daniel Vettori, the veteran, was keeping things steady at one end. The batting flourished along McCullum's aggressive intent while the likes of Kane Williamson, Grant Elliott and Corey Anderson contributed at vital times. Martin Guptill gave New Zealand cricket a memorable moment when he smashed 237 against West Indies, the second-highest score in ODIs and the highest in World Cups. Throughout the campaign, New Zealand's efficiency at vital moments pushed them over the line. Guptill, with 547 runs at an average of 68, was the leading run-scorer in this World Cup and became the first New Zealand batsman to score over 500 runs in an edition while Boult, with 22 wickets at an average of 16, underlined his credentials as the next big thing for New Zealand cricket.

Low point

Losing the final to Australia at the MCG by a big margin was definitely shattering for New Zealand. However, the lowest point came during their chase of 142 against Scotland in Dunedin. The batsman played some reckless shots and gifted their wickets away. Had it not been for some sloppy Scotland fielding, New Zealand were staring at defeat. They eventually got over the line by seven wickets but skipper McCullum admitted that the team was nervous and they had to work on the batting.

Captaincy verdict

Proactive, aggressive and leading from the front. McCullum ticked all the boxes and his contributions helped New Zealand immensely in reaching their first World Cup final. His forthright comments after the end of the match and his gentlemanly behavior, both on and off the field, made him the most admired captain in this World Cup. This was highlighted by the announcement after the end of the World Cup that he had been chosen as the captain of the World Cup team chosen by the ICC.

Most valuable player

There were some notable contributions for New Zealand in this tournament but if there was an X-factor in the team, it was McCullum. It was his aggressive intent both with the bat and in the field that dictated the course of the match. Be it setting aggressive fields or packing the slip cordon, McCullum was on the job right from the first ball. At the top, his explosive starts set the game up nicely. Just ask England, who were at the receiving end of McCullum's furious 25-ball 77. Australia will agree that if it was not for McCullum's 23-ball 50 in Auckland, the result would have been different. Although Elliott was the star in New Zealand's heart-stopping win in the semi-final against South Africa in Auckland, it must be remembered that the match was set up thanks to McCullum's audacious assault at the start. He smashed Dale Steyn for 25 runs and notched up a fifty off 23 balls. When McCullum failed, New Zealand's spine would be broken as it was evident in the final at the MCG.

Major disappointment

Kane Williamson was in freakish form heading into the tournament. He had 770 runs in 2014 at an average of 70 and in the first three matches, Williamson made some key contributions, including the unbeaten 45 in the nerve-shredder against Australia in Auckland. However, he got starts but never capitalised on it and as the tournament wore on, Williamson's form tapered off. With 234 runs at an average of just over 33 with one fifty, this tournament has been disappointing considering the high standards that Williamson set before the tournament. His inability to stabilise the middle order on a consistent basis hurt New Zealand the most during the final.

Verdict

It has been a glorious World Cup for New Zealand, despite the loss in the final. Having established a winning habit, the key for the team will be to sustain winning momentum and build a legacy that rejuvenates the team. The World Cup final was a culmination of six weeks of glorious performances but new challenges lie ahead. With Daniel Vettori retiring from international cricket, the onus will be to find a spinner who can fill his boots. The bowling looks in great shape thanks to Boult and Southee. The challenge for New Zealand is to keep winning on a consistent basis, both home and away, and ensure that they go one step better in 2019.