A tournament of missed opportunities. These five words describe Scotland's fortunes after they failed to win a single match in the 2015 ICC Cricket World Cup. Having not a game in the 1999 and 2007 editions, this tournament gave Scotland one more chance to assert themselves on the world stage but they blew it. After six heavy defeats in this edition, Scotland are left with more questions. With the ICC reducing the number of teams competing in the 2019 World Cup in England, the future is uncertain for Scottish cricket.

Record in the World Cup - Played 6, Won 0, Lost 6, Points 0

High Point

Despite a dismal campaign, there were some high points for Scotland in this edition. Josh Davey became the highest wicket-taker for Scotland in this tournament with 15 wickets in six games, the most by an Associate bowler in any edition of the World Cup. Davey, who plays for Middlesex in the County circuit, took wickets on a consistent basis and finished with a wonderful bowling average of 20.73. With the bat, Kyle Coetzer created history when he smashed 156 against Bangladesh in Nelson. This was the highest score by any batsman from a non-Test playing nation. However, failure to contribute as a team dimmed their achievements in this tournament.

Low Point

It was a tournament that was punctuated with plenty of lows. The failure to hold on to key catches during the match against New Zealand, the inability to defend 300-plus and the failure to wipe out the tail against Afghanistan were some of the missed opportunities. Scotland buckled under pressure and that cost them in every match.

Captaincy verdict

When a team is plagued with inconsistency and lack of contributions, there is very little a skipper can do. Preston Mommsen had his moments but the team failed to capitalize on the key moments. His reaction can be summed up by this line during his press conference against Afghanistan in Dunedin in which he said, "We had tasted the victory". With 148 runs at an average of 24.66, Mommsen's struggles reflected Scotland's struggles.

Most valuable player

Kyle Coetzer was the glue that held the Scotland batting together. When he succeeded, Scotland had a chance but when he failed, the team fell apart. Coetzer was Scotland's leading run-scorer in this tournament, with 253 runs at an average of 42.16. His effort was the second-best by an Associate batsman behind UAE's Shaiman Anwar, who scored 311 runs at an average of 51.83. Coetzer's knock of 71 against Scotland in Christchurch was wonderful for the way he stood up to the England bowlers on a helpful deck. His 156 against Bangladesh demonstrated his potential but he lacked consistency.

Major disappointment

Majid Haq has played a total of 54 ODIs, the most by a Scotland player. However, his experience translated into little success in the tournament. He was criticised for bowling too slowly through the air and his 19-run over against Afghanistan in Dunedin proved to be the difference in Afghanistan snatching a narrow win. The low point came when he was omitted from the game against Sri Lanka in Hobart. Haq angrily tweeted that the decision to omit him had racial undertones and he was sent back home due to breach of discipline. It was certainly a disappointing show from one of Scotland's most experienced players.

Verdict

With the ICC cutting down on the number of teams participating in the 2019 World Cup, Scotland's chances of featuring in a World tournament remain uncertain. With Ireland putting in a strong show, the chance for other Associate teams look bleak. With Scotland putting on another weak show, the future does not look good for Scottish cricket.