The first semi-final could not have been better. Drama of the highest intensity and sport of the highest pedigree. Jubilation in one camp and heartbreak in the other. In such matches you don't want to see a team lose. But that's sport. 

The question is can India-Australia live up to the billing? Will it be yet another match to remember between two in-form teams at a ground where India will sure fancy their chances? Or will the Australians continue the trend they have been maintaining all summer?

First things first- this is not the same India the Australians thrashed in the tri series. The side has adapted well to the conditions, having spent four gruelling months in this country. They love the banter in the middle and are willing to throw themselves around to save each run. The sledging doesn't bother them and the so called scarring isn't expected to be an issue either. It is a one-off game and the Indians are treating it as such. With the wives and partners here in Sydney, the players seem far more relaxed. They know that if they manage to win two more games they will be immortalised in the echelons of Indian sport. Each of them will be feted back home and their lives will change forever. 1.3 billion people will be rooting for them and all they need to do is keep calm under pressure.

India go into the Sydney semi-final as the underdog, which one must say isn't a bad thing in a high pressure game. All the pressure is on Australia. They are the home team, they have a fantastic line up and are undefeated games against India in the summer. They are expected to win. India on the other hand have turned it around wonderfully well. They have played spectacular cricket and even if they don't win, people will still feel they did well in the World Cup. For once, they will not be castigated or crucified back home and that, more than anything, should ease the pressure on them.

Cricket might well be a team sport and the match may well be seven and a half hours long. But more often than not it is decided by a few key moments and which team wins these key few minutes of the contest. In the New Zealand versus South Africa semi-final there were four such moments. First, De Villiers, the best fielder in the world, messing up the Anderson run-out. Second, Quinton De Kock missing yet another run-out chance. Third, de Villiers missing the stumps when another run-out chance was on offer and finally the JP Duminy-Farhaan Behardien collision, which is now being labelled as 'Klusener-Donald part two'. 

Having lost these key moments, South Africa are out of the World Cup. There will be a few such moments in the second semi-final as well and it all depend on which team holds their own to win these. For example, Mitchell Starc versus the Indian openers. Can Rohit Sharma do it one more time? He played a superb innings against Bangladesh and not once did he panic. He knew he could explode at the end and pick up the run rate. Will Rohit successfully ward of the Starc threat? Second, Steve Smith-Michael Clarke against Ravichandran Ashwin-Ravindra Jadeja. Smith and Clarke are the two best players of spin in the Australian ranks and can milk the Indian spinners in the middle overs. If they are able to do so, the launch pad will have been readied for Glenn Maxwell, Shane Watson and James Faulkner. Third, Suresh Raina against Faulkner and Mitchell Johnson, who will pepper him with the short stuff. Dhoni, interestingly, got into the act in the Indian nets and was seen throwing tennis balls to Raina to get him up to speed. 

Finally, and perhaps most importantly, Mohd Shami and Umesh Yadav versus David Warner and Aaron Finch. Can the Indian fast bowlers pick up early wickets? In all the games of the World Cup except the one against Ireland, they have managed to remove the opposition openers. That, more than anything, explains why India has bowled out the opposition every single time and why this team is on such a roll. Picking wickets at the top of the order will be the key for if Warner stays on, he will win the match for Australia. Also, if the Australians do get off to a flier, will India have a plan B ready to fall back on?

It is a contest that promises the world to the fans. And Sydney, one must say, is ready. Fans trooping in from all over the world, it does feel like a World Cup semi-final. About time to call play. 