Cricket is one kind of outdoor game. It is played between two teams. It is played with a ball, a bat and wickets. The ball, the bat and the wickets are properly sized for this game. They are called cricket-ball, cricket-bat and cricket-wickets.

Cricket is the national game of England. Its origin is traced back to 13th century. Cricket is very popular in England and its popularity has spread to other parts of the world. Now it is a game of international status and now match-games of cricket are being played in international tournaments.

Cricket is played between two teams. One is the bowling side and the other is the batting side. There are eleven players in each team.

The players of the bowling side play in different positions such as: Bowler, Wicket keeper, first slip, second slip, point, gully, long-off, long-on, long off boundary, long-on boundary, third man boundary.

The players of the batting side come to play as: two openers, first down, second down, third down, fourth down, fifth down, sixth down, seventh down, eighth down, ninth down.

Beside, there are tow umpires, one stands just the back of the wicket of the bowling side and the other stands some yards away, left or right of the wicket of the batting side.

Cricket is played in a round field. A cricket-wicket is made of three stumps and two bails. They are a approved size. Two wickets are correctly fixed in the middle of the cricket-field. There is a pitch between these two wickets.

The bowler bowls the ball aiming at the wicket and the batsman tries to drive this ball with his bat. When the ball is batted off, the batsman runs from this wicket to that wicket and from that wicket to this wicket as many times as it is possible for him before the ball is obtained by the players of the bowling side. If a player of the bowling side catches the batted-off ball before it falls on the ground he earns the credit of a catch and the batsman is ousted. If the stumps of bails are bowled off the batsman is ousted. Similarly run-out, hit wicket etc. are there to oust a player. In those cases another player of the batting side comes to his position. Thus, the game goes on.

In the second turn of the game the bowling team, becomes the batting team and the batting team becomes the bowling team. During the game, the runs of each team are counted. The team winning the greater number of runs is proclaimed winner. Fro any reason if a match is not complete in fixed matches are also held. In these cases both the teams make the equal run. But in one-day match there is some deviation. Tie-drawn situation does not arise. If a batsman makes one hundred runs in an innings, he earns a century. If the batted ball crosses the boundary line it is declared four and if the ball crosses the boundary line in air it is called a six.

In the game of cricket the batsman wears hand-gloves, arm-guard, leg-guards, thigh-guards, full shoes and helmet as safe against injury.
Now, the game of cricket has earned world-wide popularity. It has been popular in India too. Indian cricketers like Sunil Gavaskar, Kapil Dev and Tendulker have earned name and fame in world cricket. Still then, more and more Indian should come forward to learn this game.