It is finally done and dusted for India. While the skipper and some of the players left Sydney in the morning itself, the others are all leaving Australian shores for home by Friday night. After four long months down under, it is time to go back to familiar conditions. While on the upside India won seven matches on the trot in the ICC Cricket World Cup 2015 and beat South Africa, Pakistan and the West Indies in the process, they failed to win a single game against Australia all summer. Despite a reasonable Cricket World Cup campaign, in fact some will say better than expected, issues still remain with the team in overseas conditions that need attention.

However, before trying this critical analysis let's address something in unequivocal terms. It is a cricket match and India lost to a better team in their home conditions. Losing is no crime and unlike what a section of the televisual media in India will have us believe, there is no shame in being defeated in a cricket match. The more important question is how do you pick up the pieces from here on and move forward? How do you address the drawbacks that impacted the teams' performance all summer and how can such flaws be mended?

First, and most important, is the continuing problem with the No 7 position in the one-day format. Ravindra Jadeja as a batsman hasn't done much to inspire confidence in overseas conditions. Unless he scores big - James Faulkner for Australia is a study in contrast - India will always have a problem with the lower middle order. Jadeja should realise he is a batsman and not a slogger and someone needs to tell him as much. May be one in ten innings he will come off and that will give him a further few games to play, but from the team's perspective India need a reliable number seven to be competitive overseas.

Second is the problem with Suresh Raina against quality fast bowling. Raina is one of the best India have and is an excellent player against lesser teams. He can get on top of the bowlers in conditions where the ball doesn't bounce much and has played some excellent one-day knocks in the past. In the World Cup, Raina played a solid hand against Pakistan and also against Zimbabwe and Bangladesh. However, against the two teams with very good fast bowling attacks - South Africa and Australia - he was found wanting, and that raises questions about Raina at No 5. Raina is a key cog in the Indian batting wheel and him being found wanting against short-pitched bowling is a serious headache going forward. He is expected to be around for a few more years and it is imperative that Raina somehow finds a way to deal with the short ball.

While the fast bowlers did well and exceeded expectations, against quality batting line-ups Mohit Sharma's lack of pace may be a problem in the future. While Umesh and Shami can both clock 145kmph, Mohit isn't as fast and that places him at a disadvantage against good teams in reasonable batting conditions. Even tailenders can get stuck into him and India will have to try and shore up the fast bowling bench strength if they are to do well overseas.

Finally, one must acknowledge there are also a number of positives that India can take home from the 2015 World Cup campaign. Umesh and Shami bowled with great resolve and gusto, Mohit was good in patches, R Ashwin was superb throughout and the fielding was exceptional. India can now lay claim to being one of the best fielding sides in world cricket at the moment and that in itself is a huge step forward.

In batting, Rohit Sharma and Shikhar Dhawan did well while Virat Kohli would have liked a few more big knocks in matches that mattered. Ajinkya Rahane has come a long way since stepping onto Australian soil and MS Dhoni showed on occasions that he can still do the job with the bat in tough situations.