The 2014 Formula One season was the 65th season of the Formula One World Championship, a motor racing championship for Formula One cars recognised by the sport's governing body, the Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile (FIA), as the highest class of competition for open-wheel racing cars. The season started in Australia on 16 March and concluded in Abu Dhabi on 23 November. In the nineteen Grands Prix of the season a total of eleven teams and twenty-four drivers competed for the World Drivers' and World Constructors' Championships.

In 2014, the championship saw the introduction of a revised engine formula, in which the 2.4 litre V8 engine configuration—previously used between 2006 and 2013—was replaced with a new formula specifying a 1.6 litre turbocharged V6 engine that incorporated an energy recovery system into its build. The 2014 calendar featured substantial revisions from the 2013 season; the Russian Grand Prix was held for the first time in a century at the Sochi Autodrom in Sochi, and the Austrian Grand Prix was revived, with the race held at the Red Bull Ring in Spielberg. The Indian Grand Prix was put on hiatus, whilst the Korean Grand Prix was removed from the schedule entirely.

Sebastian Vettel started the season as defending World Drivers' Champion having secured his fourth consecutive drivers' title last season at the 2013 Indian Grand Prix. His team, Infiniti Red Bull Racing also started the season as defending World Constructors' Champion having secured their fourth consecutive constructors' title last season at the same grand prix as their lead driver secured his title.

Mercedes driver Lewis Hamilton won his second World Drivers' Championship with 384 points and 11 victories having previously won his first drivers' title in 2008, ahead of his team-mate, Nico Rosberg with 317 points, 5 victories, who won the inaugural FIA Pole Trophy. Mercedes secured their first World Constructors' Championship in Russia, and finished the season with 701 points, 296 points ahead of Red Bull Racing.