Meet the successor: Jenson Button jokes with Fernando Alonso, his expected replacement at McLaren (GETTY MAGES)
20. Lewis Hamilton is still prone to mistakes 
Lewis Hamilton's standard of driving has been been at a career peak during his best season in Formula One, but there is still room for improvement. In the middle part of the year, the errors in qualifying crept in. In Brazil, the penultimate race, a half-spin cost him the win. If he can cut out the mistakes, imagine how good he will be.
21. F1 needs more characters 
I spoke to Gerhard Berger in Austria this year, whose capacity for madness is alive and well. He started a Sky F1 interview by saying: “I know I’m not supposed to say s--- or f--- live on air”. I’m not suggesting we need more swearing, but that colourful side of F1 is lacking. Most of the drivers are relatively bland and if they do have interesting personalities the public don’t get to see much of them.
22. Nico Rosberg's allegiances are difficult to pin down
One of the most amusing moments of the year was when Lewis Hamilton, after saying his team-mate was 100% German, went on to say he was “German-Finnish-Monaco-esque, or whatever.” Rosberg is actually half German, half Finnish, and was born in Germany but grew up in Monaco.
23. Williams are back 
They assembled a strong technical team, headed by Pat Symonds, picked the right engine (Mercedes) and never looked back. Third in the constructors’ championship and a flurry of podiums is the result. The only shame is that they took the Austrian Grand Prix conservatively, when they might have won.

Double act: Williams' Valtteri Bottas and Felipe Massa flank Lewis Hamilton on the podium at Abu Dhabi (AP)
24. Red Bull can be bad losers 
Rules are rules, but not necessarily to Red Bull. They did their best to flout them in Australia, and now they have been comprehensively thumped by Mercedes, their first instinct is to lobby for a rule change, even calling for a return of the V8 engines. Not exactly gracious.
25. Kimi Raikkonen is the biggest disappointment of the year 
The oldest driver in Formula One is starting to look his age. The Kimi Raikkonen-Fernando Alonso duel was billed as one of the highlights of the year, but it has been a total non-event. Unless his form changes dramatically next season, 2015 will be his last in the sport.
26. Lewis Hamilton wins best barb of the season 
“Nico has had a silver spoon in his mouth all his life”. OK, that’s not exactly what Lewis Hamilton said. But his comments about having a “different kind of hunger” to Nico Rosberg, on account of his less privileged background (while “Nico grew up in Monaco with jets and hotels and boats”), said it all. It added some much needed spice to a rivalry which until then had been rather mundane.

The move: Lewis Hamilton takes the lead at Abu Dhabi (GETTY IMAGES)
27. Bahrain is not such a bad circuit 
After years of producing duds, Bahrain came into its own this year. Somehow, the long pit straight and the run down to turn four produced one of the all-time great races. Watching Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg duel at 200mph in the darkness was the highlight of the season.
28. The haves and have nots are more divided than ever 
Not just in terms of the differences between their budgets, but in their outlook and relationships the divisions between the big and small teams are growing. Even Mercedes, one of the few bigger beasts originally to argue for a budget cap, are out of favour. Bitterness and rancour are now some of the defining characteristics of a Formula One paddock.
29. Fernando Alonso is an enormous coup for McLaren 
Everyone – team bosses, sponsors, suppliers, fans – like a star signing. Fernando Alonso is just that. Persuading the best driver in Formula One to go to the team currently no better than fifth-best is a statement of intent. It will break the bank but bring smiles and optimism back to Woking.
30. Catching Mercedes in 2015 is a tall order 
History tells us an advantage as great as the one Mercedes enjoy will be unyielding for at least another year. The engine is the best by miles, and it will take a gargantuan effort for the others to catch up. Ferrari have conceded it is a three-year rebuilding project, while Red Bull impatiently try to change the rules to give themselves a chance.
31. Jean Todt is a peripheral figure 
Perhaps through his own focus being elsewhere, or due to some canny manoeuvring by Ecclestone, Todt has been largely left out of the recent discussions over the sport’s financial crisis. The small teams no longer appeal to the FIA as the governing body to alleviate their predicament. That says it all.
32. Nico Rosberg is a worthy adversary 
By all accounts, Rosberg has exceeded expectations. Through a mixture of qualifying speed, consistency and canniness, he has kept with Hamilton throughout the season, taking the championship to the final race.
33. F1’s new engines have been a triumph on-track 
It took about three races for the teams to make the hugely complicated V6 turbo ‘power units’ reliable. Yes, the noise could be cranked up a little bit, but they have not had the detrimental effect on racing many anticipated. Some of the top speeds achieved have also been mind-blowing: 223mph in Monza, 214mph in Brazil.
34. Talk is cheap 
Talk of a boycott by the three smallest teams in Austin consumed the paddock. It was convenient for the minnows for the story to be out there, but in retrospect, it was never serious (I admit my own failing half-believing it). They were not even prepared to use the word boycott publicly. And after the US, they said it was postponed to Brazil and would be considered if they didn’t get what they wanted. It didn’t happen then either.

Hot air: Nico Hulkenburg's Force India in Brazil (Getty Images)
35. Mercedes could still use Ross Brawn’s guiding hand 
In high pressure moments – both Monaco and Belgium – the current Mercedes leadership did not seem to have a handle on how to control the Lewis Hamilton-Nico Rosberg rivalry. Driver instruction and discipline, as well as keeping a cool head in public, has always been one of Ross Brawn’s strengths. The forgotten man can be pleased with watching his work come to fruition this year.
36. Bernie Ecclestone’s wings have been clipped 
When the trial in Munich was concluded, Bernie Ecclestone was insistent that he would be back on the board of Formula One right away. It hasn’t happened. Certain “conditions” were imposed on him and he was not immediately granted a return.

Wind beneath his wings: Vladimir Putin towers over Bernie Ecclestone (AFP)
37. The rules are too restrictive to keep the finest talents 
It is a fairly damning indictment on Formula One that its most talented, brilliant designer, is taking a step back from the sport. Adrian Newey, Red Bull’s technical chief, finds the current rules too restrictive and a barrier to creativity. We do not want another an all-out spending war, but F1 should not be putting the brightest minds off.
38. Lewis Hamilton is the qualifying master no more 
For the first time in his career, Hamilton has been beaten by a team-mate on Saturday afternoons. True, he was not helped by two dramatic failures in Germany and Hungary, which could swung it the other way. But Nico Rosberg’s laps in Canada, Belgium and Japan were particularly stunning.

King of qualifying: Nico Rosberg surveys Interlagos (AP)
39. F1’s capacity to confuse is alive and well 
Engine unfreezes and fuel-flow restrictions? It may turn on the F1 fanatic but for the ordinary fan, it can be bewildering. Remember Nico Rosberg’s retirement in Singapore? An electrical problem it was not. Instead: “Forensic analysis has revealed that the steering column electronic circuits were contaminated with a foreign substance The contamination was not visible and did not manifest itself until Sunday as Nico went to the grid.” That is part of the fun I suppose.
40. A two-tier category is on the horizon 
It has been clear for a while that the smallest teams are simply an inconvenience to CVC Capital Partners, the sport’s majority shareholders, whose ultimate aim is to float F1 on the stock market. The way to make things simpler? Have four of five big teams, who sell cars to customer teams.
41. Hamilton-Rosberg is not yet worthy of comparison with Prost-Senna 
It has been brilliant, but we need a couple more years of them slugging away, really dishing out the insults for it to reach Alain Prost-Ayrton Senna levels. We all got a bit excited in Belgium – since then it’s been fairly amicable. It would help if one side of the duel (Nico Rosberg) actually engaged in all the verbal stuff rather than “keeping everything internal”.
42. Formula One has a Germany problem 
Full house in Canada. Full house in Austria. Full house in the UK. Barely half-full in Germany. With a German reigning world champion, a German team winning all the races, and a German driver in this year’s title fight, work that one out.
43. Max Mosley was right 
When the former FIA president proposed a cap of £40 million – an unrealistically low figure – he warned that if nothing was done, teams would die. He has been proved right. Caterham were the first to go into administration, followed by Marussia. Both surely have little chance of making it back. Sauber are the latest team under immense pressure.
44. ‘Ronspeak’ is not dead 
Getting a straight answer from Ron Dennis to a straight question is not an easy task. He joked before the year began that ‘Ronspeak’ was done but it is alive and well. Just look at the use of the word “optimal” in their recent non-announcement of their drive line-up! The usual bluster was also there. “We will win races,” he thundered by the season began. Right…
45. Lewis Hamilton goes it alone 
After emotionally telling us how he has “the father he always wanted”, it soon emerged that Hamilton is going it alone, ending his contract with Simon Fuller’s XIX Entertainment by mutual consent. It is a sign of his newfound confidence. But don’t be surprised if he emerges from negotiations with Mercedes with a heavily reduced salary.
46. Friendship among team-mates is almost impossible 
Mercedes' marketing of Nico Rosberg and Lewis Hamilton as friends – which the media lapped up – disguised the fact that as soon as anything meaningful was up for grabs the gloves would come off. Nowadays the two are pleasant with one another but do not speak a great deal. Their embrace in Abu Dhabi was nice to see, but once they are racing again next year, the gloves will come off again.
47. Michael Schumacher is the same fighter he always was 
The build-up to the season was marred by Michael Schumacher’s terrible skiing accident, with an outpouring of goodwill for the German. As he did in his Formula One days, he has fought in his recovery. Details of his current condition are unclear but he has been steadily improving over the months since the crash.

Fighter: Michael Schumacher is still battling (GETTY IMAGES)
48. F1 is bereft of heavyweight figures 
In the space of 12 months F1 has lost Ross Brawn, Martin Whitmarsh, Stefano Domenicali, Luca di Montezemolo, and Adrian Newey (sort of). That cannot be a good thing for F1. A new generation is coming through but we need these big beasts, known by the public, at the heart of the sport.
49. There is still a place for the minnows
Marussia’s points in Monaco or Force India’s podium in Bahrain make up part of the magic of Formula One. F1 would be a worse place without them. Someone has to lose, after all.