There can only ever be one ultimate winner at the end of a Formula 1 season – in this case 2014 world champion Lewis Hamilton – but there’s always plenty of driver performances to admire throughout the grid.

So, with 24 men in total having started at least one race this year, here, in final Drivers’ Championship classification, is how they’ve rated...

Lewis Hamilton


Championship position – 1st, 384 points; Best result – 1st (x11)

The best man won as a deserved champion.

True, armed with the fastest car and one of the most dominant in the history of F1, Hamilton may have made hard work of it, but then again, that was the reason why his triumph was ultimately so impressive: it was hard work. Hit hard by unreliability, hit harder still by his team-mate in Spa to fall 29 points adrift of the title summit, Lewis’s response, headlined by six victories in the final seven races, was metaphorically and literally just champion. Even Nico had to admit, in the final reckoning, that he had been beaten by the better driver.

Only in qualifying did Hamilton lag behind, suffering defeat to a team-mate on a Saturday for the first time in his F1 career. Yet there was a pertinent mitigation to this loss with Hamilton invariably devoting his efforts in Friday’s practice sessions to honing his race-day set-up. The result, more often than not, was a comprehensive defeat of Rosberg when it counted. The final margin of title victory, 67 points, was perhaps a little harsh on Nico, but, nevertheless, it did not flatter the victor. If his triumph was over adversity and the negativity of unreliability and dubious driving, it was also a positive success story of spellbinding speed and belated maturity. He may have made hard work of it 2014, but he probably wouldn’t have made it all five years ago. PG

2014 rating: 9/10

Nico Rosberg


Championship position – 2nd, 317 points; Best result – 1st (x5)

If the unreliability boot had been on the other foot at Mercedes in Abu Dhabi, it would have been hard to argue that Nico Rosberg was a more deserving World Champion than Lewis Hamilton. The cold, hard facts from the season would have suggested as much: on the 14 occasions both W05s made the finish on race day in 2014, only four times did Rosberg finish as the lead Silver Arrow – and two of those times was when his team-mate had started out of position on the grid. However, on the flip side of that argument, it would also churlish to downplay Nico’s impressive achievements across a season in which he was finally able to definitively prove to doubters that he warrants a place at F1’s top table.

While it brought him no more than a fairly meaningless pole position trophy, Rosberg’s 12-7 defeat of Hamilton in qualifying – despite his own, largely forgotten, Saturday wobbles at the start of the year in addition to his team-mate’s mid-year mechanical problems – was no mean feat and important for his reputation given it’s the Briton who is habitually labelled as the outright fastest man in F1. While gently mocked as ‘Britney’ in his early days by Mark Webber, Rosberg also showed he had the inner steel to go with his flowing blonde locks, notably in his response to Hamilton’s early four-race victory streak, that perfect weekend in Brazil and, yes, even by keeping his nose in to ‘prove a point’ at Spa. The ‘did he or didn’t he’ events of Q3 in Monaco also cast Rosberg in an unexpectedly Machiavellian light in some people’s eyes.

In the end though, it was that superior pace and race craft of Hamilton’s on Sundays which told in the final championship reckoning. The big question heading towards 2015 is whether Rosberg will come again or, rather like Webber’s fall into shadows following Sebastian Vettel’s first title in 2010, his best chance of title glory has already been and gone. JG

2014 rating: 8/10

Daniel Ricciardo


Championship position – 3rd, 238 points; Best result – 1st (x3)

Without doubt Daniel Ricciardo was the standout performer of 2014 after a remarkable debut season at Red Bull. Don’t be fooled by the smiley exterior, the 25-year-old proved to be a tough competitor on track. He comprehensively outperformed his team-mate and reigning World Champion Sebastian Vettel, winning the qualifying battle 12-7 and the race head-to-head 14-5. Indeed perhaps those performances played a part in Vettel leaving for Ferrari a year before his Red Bull contract expired.

Ricciardo finished the season as the only non-Mercedes driver to win a race and was always seemingly the man on hand to capitalise when Lewis Hamilton or Nico Rosberg hit strife. That ability would help him pick up three victories, including one in Hungary which the Australian feels was a straight fight.

This really was the season that Ricciardo came of age and established himself as a top F1 driver and as a man capable of delivering Australia’s first world title since Alan Jones in 1980. 2015 will represent a different challenge as he becomes de-facto team leader, but there is no reason to think he cannot build on this year and continue to be a front-runner. WE

2014 rating: 9/10

Valtteri Bottas


Championship position – 4th, 186 points; Best result – 2nd (x2)

While there’s no doubting Daniel Ricciardo’s status as F1’s breakthrough star in 2014, neither can it be denied that Valtteri Bottas has done anything other than impress greatly. The Finn might not have won races or shown a four-time defending World Champion how to do it, but he still did everything that was asked of him and arguably more besides.

The final standings show Bottas fourth in the standings behind Ricciardo; more important, however, is the fact that he also wound up comfortably ahead of team-mate Felipe Massa. Only those biased beyond reason would compare the Brazilian to Sebastian Vettel but if a team-mate represents the benchmark then Bottas passed with flying colours.

Both were helped, of course, by Williams’ return to form and were it not for his contact with the wall early on in Melbourne, Bottas would have finished on the podium in the very first race. But the summer brought a string of top-three finishes, including second places at Silverstone and Hockenheim, with the British GP arguably Valtteri’s best as he carved his way through from 17th on the grid, seemingly with ease. Moreover, his performances might not have matched Ricciardo’s in terms of their sheer opportunistic chutzpah but one suspects the 25-year-old prefers it that way (and it’s also worth pointing out that Bottas has rather less experience). Mission accomplished. MW

2014 rating: 8/10

Sebastian Vettel


Championship position – 5th, 167 points; Best result – 2nd

What was it that Fernando Alonso said of the recently-crowned quadruple World Champion last November? Ahh, yes: “When he will have a car like the others, if he wins, he will have a great recognition and be one of the legends in F1. When one day he has a car like the others and he is fourth, fifth, seventh, these four titles will be bad news for him because people will take these four titles even in a worse manner than they are doing now. So there are interesting times for Sebastian coming."

How resonant those words sound a year later in the wake of Sebastian’s defeat to Daniel Ricciardo, his average finishing position of fifth, and the German’s struggles – bordering on inability – to master the rear-end instability of the RB10. Which isn’t to say that his four titles, in the RB10’s aerodynamically pitch-perfect successors, should be considered hollow triumphs, but there’s no denying that one skill every great sportsman possesses is the ability to adapt. It’s a test which Sebastian ignominiously failed in 2014.

In total, there were just four podium visits, and none at all to the top step where Ricciardo stood on three different occasions. But for the German’s bad luck on a few occasions, it could be termed a thrashing. Still, if you think 2014 has been a bad year for Vettel’s reputation because of Ricciardo’s exploits, spare a thought for what it did for Mark Webber’s and try not to wince. PG

2014 rating: 5/10

Fernando Alonso


Championship position – 6th, 161 points; Best result – 2nd

So, the partnership that was meant to dominate F1 has crumbled, two years early and without a single World Championship title to its name. That Alonso leaves Ferrari with the same status as when he arrived – a ‘mere’ two-time world champion – certainly reflects a case of Ferrari having failed Fernando, rather than Fernando failing Ferrari. Such a reality was never more the case than in 2014, with the team’s hope that a move away from an aerodynamic-dominant formula would present the springboard from which to return to winning ways proving to be as flawed as the F14 T they created to suit the new engine regulations. As a result Fernando graced the podium just twice all season – and not once the top step.

Not that such an unusually low-key run of results harmed Alonso’s standing in the sport – in fact the two podiums he did achieve, particularly his gallant tyre preservation run to second place in Hungary, only served to increase his widespread reputation as the best all-round driver in F1. The fact the Spaniard also turned what had been an eagerly-anticipated intra-team battle with Raikkonen into an effective no-contest in his favour only added further fuel to the feeling that he was still operating at his peak, even if Ferrari quite definitely weren’t. That he’s heading back to McLaren of all places shows how exasperating his time at Maranello became. JG

2014 rating: 8/10

Felipe Massa


Position – 7th, 134 points; Best result – 2nd

Freed from the restraints of being ‘number two’ at Ferrari, Felipe Massa certainly experienced a highly eventful first season at Williams. His 2014 results card, which lurched from the downright underwhelming to the highly impressive, showed as much. Williams had arguably the second best car in 2014, yet Massa found himself languishing seventh in the Drivers’ Championship and only narrowly ahead of Jenson Button despite the flaws of the McLaren car.

Part of Massa’s problem – particularly early on in the season - was that he regularly found himself involved in contact with other drivers. The most notable occasions came in Germany, where he turned in on Kevin Magnussen at the first corner leading to him rolling his Williams, and Canada when he was involved in a huge race ending shunt with Sergio Perez. Back in Malaysia and there were signs of insubordination too when the Brazilian refused to obey team-orders to let team-mate past

But, for all that, there were some memorable highs too. Massa’s biggest achievement was pole in Austria – the only non-Mercedes pole position all season – although failed to capitalise on it and actually finished behind his team-mate and off the podium. He did turn around his race-day form late in the season, though, with podiums in his homeland of Brazil and Abu Dhabi providing glimpses of the man who challenged for the 2008 world title. With plenty of talented drivers waiting in the GP2 wings, he must produce more of those moments and take the fight back to Bottas in 2015. WE

2014 rating: 6/10