Jenson Button


Championship position – 8th, 126 points; Best result – 3rd

Still unsure of his F1 future at the time of writing, Jenson Button has been left dangling by McLaren and their desire to have all their ducks in a row for next season. All 3000 of them, one might think, judging by the endless carry on, although in truth one also wonders why this particular duck hasn’t simply grown tired and quacked off elsewhere by now.

Partnered by Kevin Magnussen this season, the final reckoning shows Button with twice as many points as the youngster, who was labelled ‘lightning quick’ by Martin Whitmarsh. In that case, how to describe Button? After all, he did also outqualify Magnussen over the course of the season, which says something about his supposed weakness – assuming, of course, that the former team boss was right in his assessment of the Dane.

Most of this can be put down to Button’s status as F1’s longest-serving driver and how he’s coped more ably with a car – another – that hasn’t cut the mustard. In this context, it seems particularly unfair that McLaren are making both drivers sweat on their futures while their negotiations with Fernando Alonso meander along, but concepts such as fairness and loyalty don’t seem to carry much weight in this rarefied world. Having said that, Jenson’s experience might – particularly if McLaren’s new partnership with Honda encounters teething troubles. That certainly appeared the case at Abu Dhabi’s post-season test; in the final reckoning, might it help tip the scales in Button’s favour? MW

2014 rating: 7.5/10

Nico Hulkenberg


Championship position – 9th, 96 points; Best result – 5th (x4)

In a curious twist, it’s the long-established fact that Nico is finally standing still between seasons which serves to support the contention that this was the first year since Nico left Williams when his stock has failed to rise. Having out-driven his Sauber throughout 2013, raising his profile to such an extent that he was widely considered to be a viable candidate for both Ferrari and McLaren, Nico’s name was conspicuously absent 12 months later when a host of vacancies arose amongst the big guns. The announcement that he would be staying on at Force India was issued as early as October and was issued with suitably little fanfare.

While unfortunate in 2013, when his height was considered a tall order, there’s no sense that Hulkenberg ought to be given his big team breakthrough this time around. The Hulk certainly showed up in 2014, scoring 96 points to his team-mate’s 59, but he didn’t exactly star. A podium result – which Sergio Perez registered in only his third race as a Force India driver – still eludes the German.

His foray into Le Mans for Porsche, whilst laudable and impressive, also carried a hint of frustration with a F1 career which has become stuck in the awkward middleground of the grid. 2015 otherwise has all the portents of being another hard slog. If Nico’s breakthrough doesn’t come soon, his shot at the big time may never turn up. PG

2014 rating: 7/10

Sergio Perez


Championship position – 10th, 59 points; Best result – 3rd

When Sergio Perez’s F1 career hung in the balance for a few weeks after his late-season axing by McLaren in 2013, it appeared that a driver who had burst into the sport in such eye-catching fashion at Sauber was at 23 years old already going to have to contemplate life away from motorsport’s top table. The Mexican’s early potential hadn’t been forgotten everywhere though as Force India came to his rescue and, 12 months, on the team’s faith in Perez’s qualities has by and large been rewarded. While it may have been Nico Hulkenberg who collected more points during the season, Perez played no small role in helping the team take the fight to, of all teams, McLaren and achieve their best-ever season.

His Hulkenberg-beating podium in that unforgettable race of team-mate duels in Bahrain – Force India’s first for five years – was Perez’s undoubted standout performance, but there were other eye-catching drive to solid points too, particularly at Monza when he came out on top in a wheel-to-wheel dice with ex-partner Jenson Button. In fact, while Hulkenberg won their qualifying battle 12-7 and scored 37 more points over the year, it was Perez who headed both categories from the summer break onwards.

There were messy moments too - that scary crash with Massa, which both drivers blamed the other for, in Canada being the most dramatic - but given Perez only turns 25 in January, there are bound to still be some rough edges to iron out. A new multi-year deal with Force India should give him the platform to try and do just that. JG

2014 rating: 6/10

Kevin Magnussen


Championship position – 11th, 55 points; Best result – 2nd

What a disappointment Kevin Magnussen was in his debut season. He was labelled ‘lightning quick’ by ex-McLaren boss Martin Whitmarsh and his qualifying record in the final rounds of the 2013 Formula Renault 3.5 season suggested as much. Yet he was out-qualified over the season by Jenson Button – who has never been famed for his single-lap pace – and scored less than half the points of the Briton.

Second-place on his debut was seemingly a false dawn as he did little to justify the sacking of Sergio Perez after just a solitary season at McLaren by making the top five on just one other occasion.

On form alone there is no basis to keep the Dane ahead of Button, but the pace he demonstrated in Formula Renault doesn’t disappear overnight. Too often, though, particularly in the second half of the season, the Dane was found out of the points. If he is given a second season he needs to up his game big time or it could be little more than a stay of execution after Stoffel Vandoorne’s impressive debut year in GP2. WE

2014 Rating: 5/10

Kimi Raikkonen


Championship position – 12th, 55 points; Best result – 4th

There’s no way around it: Kimi Raikkonen’s return to Ferrari was a big disappointment. There we all were pre-season, salivating at the prospect of how the Finn – just by doing his thing, with no conscious moves behind the scenes to ‘win over’ the Scuderia – might get under the skin of Fernando Alonso.

As it turned out, however, there were times when Raikkonen seemed to go missing in action, with the momentum he built during his two seasons at Lotus sadly lost. Not that Kimi ever threw in the towel and heaven help anyone who suggested that the 2007 champion had actually lost interest. No, it was more the case that, in the F14 T, Ferrari had delivered a car that lacked grunt on the straights and, in Raikkonen’s hands at least, struggled to get round the corners.

There were signs during the summer that, in a less literal sense, he might have turned the corner with fourth place at the Belgian GP. However, that was also the race that Ferrari technical director James Allison admitted the problems he’d been having were inherent in the car’s design and that little, therefore, would change. That proved the case and with Raikkonen hinting mid-season that 2015 will be his last, it’ll be interesting to see whether both Sebastian Vettel’s arrival and the prospect of a better car can halt the slide. MW

2014 rating: 4/10

Jean-Eric Vergne


Championship position – 13th, 22 points; Best result – 6th

The problematic crux of Jean-Eric’s season, and the two before it, was encapsulated by the low-key nature of his self-announced exit from the sport in late November: a shame but not quite sad. The Frenchman may never have done much wrong, and he did plenty that was good, but the verdict from Red Bull – that he didn’t show sufficient star quality – is difficult to quibble with.

Three years after his debut, he remains as much a puzzle as he was when he entered the sport. He’s an enigma wrapped up by indifference, more likely to neuter debate than inspire division of opinion. There just wasn’t enough of an impact or a splash in 2014 – or in 2013 or in 2012.

Given that he was only outscored by Daniel Ricciardo by a point, and the Aussie then trumped Sebastian Vettel, and that JEV scored three times as many points as Daniil Kvyat during their year together, there’s no dispute that Vergne is – and was – up to scratch. But it’s telling in itself that JEV will ultimately be remembered in reference to his two Toro Rosso team-mates. There was never a moment during those three years when JEV did enough to break free, to define himself in his own right and sprinkle sufficient stardust over his F1 CV to justify a fourth year in the Red Bull school of hard knocks that is only concerned with graduating the next F1 superstar. PG

2014 rating: 6/10

Romain Grosjean


Championship position – 14th, 8 points; Best result – 8th (x2)

If Lotus’s already-best-left-forgotten season is ultimately to be remembered for anything, then perhaps it’s Romain Grosjean’s catalogue of exasperated-sounding radio messages. “I cannot believe it! Bloody engine! Bloody engine!” was one such cry from Singapore qualifying and the harmony – or lack of it – between the troubled E22 and the Renault power unit proved the depressing story of the once race-winning team’s troubled campaign.

Given Grosjean had come into the season having successfully completed something akin to racing driver rehabilitation by going from ‘first-lap nutcase’ to reliable podium finisher, Lotus’s fall from grace was understandably all the harder to take. Back-to-back eighth-place finishes at the start of the European season were as good as things got for Grosjean. In hindsight, Grosjean's lap in Barcelona qualifying which took the recalcitrant E22 to fifth on the grid may well have been the best of anyone all season.

After a little uncertainty, Grosjean’s stay at Enstone was finally confirmed just before the season was out, the lure of a supply of the class-leading Mercedes engine 2015 certainly an appetising prospect. The good news for Grosjean and his career is that, surely, things couldn’t get much worse. JG

2014 rating: 5.5/10

Daniil Kvyat


Championship position –15th, 8 points; Best result – 9th (x3)

Was it too soon to promote Daniil Kvyat after just a single season in GP3 and a handful of laps in an F1 car at a Young Driver Test? Certainly not on the basis of the young Russian’s performances in 2014.

Whilst eight points may seem like a lowly return – particularly in comparison to teammate Jean-Eric Vergne’s 22 – it doesn’t tell the full story of Kvyat’s rookie year. He produced a number of strong drives throughout the campaign that perhaps didn’t reap the rewards they deserved. A number of mechanical retirements also blighted his season.

But there were plenty of positives. The two  performances that stand out are the points on his debut in Australia that made Kvyat the youngest points scorer in F1 history and then qualifying a remarkable fifth at his home race in Sochi. The Red Bull bosses were obviously impressed as when Sebastian Vettel departed it was the young Russian picked to fill the shoes of the four-time World Champion – and those are big shoes to fill.  WE

2014 rating: 6/10

Pastor Maldonado


Championship position – 16th, 2 points; Best result – 9th

The Abu Dhabi GP’s funniest moment – one of the funniest of the season – was the reaction of Lotus’s mechanics when Pastor Maldonado’s car spectacularly went ‘pop’ on lap 26. It was fitting the demise of the recalcitrant, if not downright useless, black E22 should be met by gleeful black humour, with the team clearly delighted to see the back of such a dud.

Yet they’ll still have Maldonado to contend with in 2015. The fact that Lotus announced the Venezuelan’s continued presence as early as July while McLaren have continued to make Jenson Button sweat on his future tells us plenty about the state of the sport right now and how judgement gets thrown out of the window. Should Pastor be in F1? Well he is; and hard as it is to believe, there is a talented driver in there. Somewhere.

When Lotus announced his arrival, they suggested they could knock him into shape as they did his team-mate Romain Grosjean. Of course, the Frenchman has also struggled with such a poor car but in terms of performance, he’s made mincemeat of Maldonado. (In contrast, Lotus confirmed only recently that Grosjean is staying for 2015, although one suspects part of the delay was down to the driver casting a hopeful eye elsewhere.)

In the event, Maldonado scored two points. But in a season that skirted farce, particularly in the early races, he’ll perhaps be best remembered for his visit to the gravel at the pitlane entry during practice in Shanghai – not just for the crash but, again, the response of Lotus’s mechanics. Even then they seemed resigned to their fate. The question now is whether the team, while banking the cheques, can also help F1’s most maligned driver salvage some semblance of a reputation. MW

2014 rating: 3/10

Jules Bianchi


Championship position – 17th, 2 points; Best result – 9th

The tragedy of 2014, a year cast into perpetual darkness by the horror which the Marussia driver, popular and talented in equal measure, endured on October 5.

His accident remains F1’s darkest hour in 20 years, a harrowing reminder of the perils of driving the world’s fastest motor vehicles in a competitive environment, and a gut-wrenching adjournment on a career that promised so much. Marussia’s subsequent decline and disappearance into administration, rendering Bianchi’s previous achievements meaningless, was the insult to grievous injury.

The highlight of Jules’ season, by any objective measurement, had to be his points-scoring effort in May’s Monaco GP, when he navigated his Marussia to ninth in the sport’s showcase event. But it was his efforts on an otherwise instantly-forgettable Wednesday afternoon in July, when he tested for Ferrari at Silverstone and instantly set a time better than the best Kimi Raikkonen had managed the week before around the British GP venue, which resonated even further. Here, surely, was the proof that Jules was destined for a race seat with Ferrari by the close of his career.

And then, on a wet, murky October evening at Suzuka, it all went dark. PG

#ForzaJules

Adrian Sutil

Championship position – 18th, 0 points; Best result – 11th (x2)


If, as seems likely, Adrian Sutil has raced his last race in F1 then the German will have exited stage left with barely a hint of fanfare. And in characteristic fashion some might say given Sutil, while the veteran of seven seasons and 128 starts, had rarely grabbed many headlines on track during a career in which one fourth-place finish five years ago stands as his best result.

Such were Sauber’s travails this year, that even a tenth place would have been something to shout about for the German driver given the Swiss team failed to register a point for the first time in their whole history. The combination of unprecedented budget constraints and an underperforming Ferrari turbo engine meant 2014 was an uphill struggle for both Sutil and Esteban Gutierrez right from the get go, with the C33 and its troublesome brake-by-wire system tripping both men up repeatedly.

Sutil proved to be one of 2014’s most frequent spinners and, to his apparent surprise, his career was then sent into a tailspin at season’s end when Sauber signed up cash-heavy Ericsson and Nasr for 2015 within a matter of days. His farewell from the team in Abu Dhabi – 15th in qualifying and then 16th in the race – summed up a forgettable year. JG

2014 rating: 4/10

Marcus Ericsson