Marcus Ericsson


Championship position – 19th, 0 points; Best result – 11th

Rookie of the Year is an Americanism and, as such, F1 doesn’t have one. Even if it did, Marcus Ericsson wouldn’t have won; but if ever there was a gong handed out in recognition of a rookie driver’s stoicism in the face of adversity – a medal would, perhaps, be most apt – then he would have earned it hands down. After all, not only was Ericsson saddled with the lamest horse in the field, he also had to contend with a revolving door of owners and trainers. (Swedish accent) “Who are you?” (Insert accent as appropriate) “I’m your new boss, Marcus. Could you write us a cheque?”

As the season progressed and Caterham started toppling into the abyss, Ericsson’s performances actually improved. He ended up top of the bottom of the pile battle ahead of team-mate Kamui Kobayashi and rivals Marussia but after both teams went into administration, the 24-year-old called it a day. As such, his best result remains the 11th he scored in Monaco; as good as anything any other Caterham driver has ever managed, yet eclipsed by the ninth place Jules Bianchi earned for Marussia on the very same day. Typical eh?  

Ericsson has now joined Sauber – and already tested for them, in fact, in Abu Dhabi, after a combination of his sponsor’s loot and their empty coffers gained him a 2015 seat. But when one considers where the Swiss team finished this season, he’ll likely be up against it again. MW

2014 rating: 4/10

Esteban Gutierrez


Championship position – 20th, 0 points; Best result – 12th

If Esteban Gutierrez has left F1 then, to say the least, it’s with a whimper. The Mexican has barely registered this season and ended it more-or-less level pegging with team-mate Adrian Sutil. That in itself says something about the drivers, the team…the Sauber situation in general. There’s been no real hint of genuine promise from the 23-year-old, more a sort of vacuum. Has there been a more anonymous driver on the grid?

Of course, Gutierrez’s cause hasn’t been helped by Sauber’s Ferrari-powered C33, which was overweight and underpowered. It was also grey – slate grey, in fact, and attractive in its way. But really it should have been painted beige. His best result was 12th in Melbourne but that was gained by attrition, just by being there at the end. He hopes to stay in F1 in 2015 and insists there are “several alternatives” – reserve driver roles, presumably. Otherwise, only good hard cash and the survival of either Caterham or Marussia can save him. MW

2014 rating: 4/10

Max Chilton


Championship position – 21st, 0 points; Best result – 13th (x2)

Well, he did at least finish above Kamui Kobayashi. Otherwise, this was an instantly forgettable year for the Marussia driver.

While Jules Bianchi took the plaudits for scoring the team’s first points, Max struggled to make his presence felt at the back of the grid, generally slipping from view on a race weekend at the Q1 stage on a Saturday afternoon. Last seen retiring from the Russian GP in October prior to Marussia’s regression into administration, it remains to be seen whether Max’s race in F1 is run too. PG

2014 rating: 4/10

Kamui Kobayashi


Championship position – 22nd, 0 points; Best result – 13th (x2)

Poor Kamui Kobayashi appeared to be in a regular state of bewilderment the longer 2014 went on as the various fun and games at Caterham played out around him. After being ‘benched’ mid-season for Spa, only to return to his seat two weeks later at Monza, the Japanese when asked what was going on at the team bluntly replied “I have the same question for the boss”. The bizarre events of Sochi, when Kobayashi implied he had been told to retire a healthy car, only served to heighten the confusion.

Back at the start of the year and the Japanese’s widely-welcomed return to the sport after a year away appeared to be part of then-owner Tony Fernandes’ last throw of the dice at F1, the Malaysian hoping for a repeat of the swashbuckling performances that made Kobayashi such a cult hero while at Sauber. The rather gaping flaw in that plan was that the Japanese wasn’t given the car to perform any underdog miracles although, for his part, he did trounce team-mate Marcus Ericsson and regularly take the fight to Marussia. But, given he gave up a role with Ferrari in the WEC to come back to F1, Kobayashi could be forgiven for wondering why he bothered. JG

2014 rating: 5/10

Will Stevens


Championship position – 23rd, 0 points; Best result – 17th

It is hard to cast a critical eye over Will Stevens given he contested just one race this season after getting the dubious honour of driving for Caterham in the Abu Dhabi finale.

The Briton produced a solid weekend, kept the car out of the barriers and picked up his pace as the sessions progressed, gradually closing the gap to Kamui Kobayashi. In the race he got the car to the finish without incident and proved he was more than capable of competing on an F1 track – even if Fernando Alonso may disagree! WE

2014 rating: N/A

Andre Lotterer


Championship position – 24th, 0 points; Best result – DNF

The three-time Le Mans winner made a brief appearance for Caterham at the Belgian Grand Prix and remarkably was immediately quicker than Marcus Ericsson.

Despite his lack of experience in the car, the German carried that pace into qualifying and was nearly a second quicker than Ericsson who had a vast number more test and race miles clocked up in the CT05. WE