1. Lewis Hamilton is the right champion – more titles are on the way 
Eleven wins, 384 points and 16 podiums mark a job well done for Lewis Hamilton. No one can argue that he is the worthy winner – as Nico Rosberg admirably admitted – with a comfortable margin of victory. He will only get better next season. With Mercedes likely to be out in front, title No3 does not seem that far away.

Champagne supernova: Lewis Hamilton tastes victory (AFP)
2. F1 fans have never had it so good
Apart from all the bickering that goes on, Formula One as a spectacle is in broadly good health. We have had to endure only a few poor races this year, with some absolutely stunning ones and most very entertaining. The days of the leader winning by more than half a minute are long gone.
3. Daniel Ricciardo is an absolute revelation
The honey badger is all sweet on the outside but clearly has a steely inner core. How else would he thump four-time reigning champion Sebastian Vettel in their first season as team-mates? Daniel Ricciardo has won three races and effectively forced Vettel out of Red Bull. Not a bad effort for someone people thought could not overtake.
Related Articles
Hamilton's F1 career: in pictures 24 Nov 2014
Money deals oil Formula One wheels 07 Dec 2014
From council house to place among legends 23 Nov 2014
Hamilton is the champion Formula One needs 23 Nov 2014
Prince Harry tells Hamilton: 'You're a legend' 23 Nov 2014
F1 2014: How the season unfolded 23 Nov 2014

Breakthrough: Daniel Ricciardo has had an outstanding season (PA)
4. Bernie Ecclestone remains one of sport’s great survivors
Say what you like about Bernie Ecclestone, but has anyone at the top of professional sport survived so much controversy? Many had presumed (and privately hoped) his trial for bribery in Munich would be the end. It was not to be. A £60 million settlement later and he was still in charge. He may not be by the first race of next season, however.
5. Sebastian Vettel’s title defence was among the worst ever
For all the bad luck and unreliability Vettel suffered, particularly in the early part of the season, this was a dismal title defence. He did not have the car, yet he was still given a lesson by his team-mate. Greats adapt to different rules and regulations, different breeds of Formula One car. Vettel did not.

The art of goodbye: Red Bull bid farewell to Sebastian Vettel (PA)
6. Nico Rosberg has a devious streak
Three years with Michael Schumacher have clearly rubbed off on Nico Rosberg. As many of his fellow drivers privately attest, he is not averse to a professional foul. The ‘mistake’ in Monaco appears to have been a deliberate act. He did not emerge from Spa with a clean copybook either. More so than Lewis Hamilton, he is prepared to employ some underhand tactics.
7. 'Taxi-cab' driving this new era is not
Luca di Montezemolo, the now departed Ferrari president, made this particularly amusing claim in Bahrain before the race. On the same day, Bernie Ecclestone said the situation was “not acceptable to the public”. Bahrain ended up being one of the most spectacular races for years, and both looked rather silly. Across the season, duff races have been few and far between.
8. Lewis Hamilton is smart enough after all
For whatever reason, it was thought before this season began that this era of relentless car management would not suit Hamilton, a natural racer who just wants to attack. Some of his fellow drivers hinted as much. How wrong that theory has proved.
9.There has never been a more absurd rule than double points
As soon as it became obvious Mercedes would run away with the championship, double points became like a recurring nightmare for Formula One. Thankfully, it did not interfere with the final result. One for the scrapheap.
10. F1 remains a dangerous sport
Jules Bianchi’s horrific accident in the Japanese Grand Prix was an untimely reminder of something everyone in the sport has always known but those outside have forgotten: motorsport is dangerous. Improvements to safety will happen, of course they will. In the meantime we simply hope for good news from Yokkaichi, Japan.

Reminder: Jules Bianchi's crash reiterates how dangerous F1 remains (AFP)
11. In close combat, Rosberg is no match for Hamilton
Not once in wheel-to-wheel combat has Nico Rosberg emerged the victor. In Bahrain, despite being quicker, he lost out. He crashed into Lewis Hamilton in Belgium and was given the equivalent of a slap in the face in the US. The German still lacks credibility in this regard.

Lewis Hamilton overtakes Nico Rosberg during the Bahrain GP (GETTY IMAGES)
12. McLaren are answering the wrong question
Do McLaren really have a driver problem? Jenson Button lacks some qualifying speed but is incredibly consistent in the races, while Kevin Magnussen is young and has bags of potential. The problem remains with their car and with the aerodynamics, which they are beginning to address.
13. The FIA has abdicated its responsibilities
The Strategy Group – made up of Bernie Ecclestone, the big teams, and the FIA – makes the rules in Formula One now. The FIA allowed it to be created in return for a small but valuable shareholding in F1. It has the authority to overturn decisions agreed on by the entire sport and has made the FIA (the governing body, after all), impotent and powerless. Look at how forcing a cost cap through went.
14. Ferrari blew their big chance…
Only one team enjoyed the same advantages as Mercedes, of developing the engine and chassis in tandem. That team – Ferrari – have had their worst season for years. They have merely two podiums to show for their efforts, and have never looked like winning a race.

Season of torment: Ferrari line up at Abu Dhabi (AP)
15. …And fell on their swords
First, Stefano Domenicali, the team principal, tired of the political environment at Maranello, left Ferrari. Then, the engine chief, Luca Marmonini, was given the axe. And finally, the biggest fish of them all, Luca di Montezemolo, left after a rift with the Fiat CEO, Sergio Marchionne. The one thing you cannot accuse Ferrari of this year is not taking responsibility for failure.
16. Dogs are not welcome in Formula One
While they may be omnipresent on Twitter, Roscoe and Coco haven’t found their way into a Formula One paddock this year. Lewis Hamilton’s dogs have had to stay either in the hotel or back at home, after Mercedes (most likely Niki Lauda) indicated it was not proper to have them at the track. Quite right. Look at the difference it has made…
17. F1’s engines are financially crippling
The cost of the engines this year has skyrocketed, from as little as £8 million to an average of £27 million. It is no exaggeration to say this has forced Marussia out of business and put Caterham on the brink. Costs will gradually come down, but will it be too late for the other small teams?
18. Some of Bernie Ecclestone’s ideas are madder than ever 
Formula One doesn’t need young people. Really? I know 84-year-olds probably have more money to spend on expensive watches, but someone has to grow up to be 84… Third cars and customer cars are equally barmy. Do you think Ferrari will be happy to be in F1 when the best they can manage is 16th?
19. Jenson Button has more to offer 
Jenson Button has had a great run – and he is still good enough to keep going. I only wish he had got together some investors and bought Marussia, or something like that, and used his experience and technical knowhow to build a team up from the bottom.

