Always wait for something good and it happens, because whatsoever happens, we create. In fact we create it; we sow the seeds. But we sow the seeds unconsciously, that's why we think that some accident has happened. Accidents never happen, nothing is ever accidental. It is a cosmos, it is not a chaos. Everything is absolutely based on a fundamental ultimate law: nothing ever goes wrong. Yes, sometimes it looks to us as if it has gone wrong, because we were expecting something else. That’s a problem --we do one thing, we sow one seed and we expect something else.

We sow the seeds of one kind of flower and we expect some other kind of flower, so when the flowers come we are frustrated. But flowers come through the seeds, not our wishes. So remember: We constantly create our world. There are people who are constantly afraid that something wrong is going to happen, and then it happens! And when it happens, they are proved right. They have made it happen. People who are afraid will always find situations in which fear grips them. People who are loving will always find situations where love blooms.

Because this existence goes on giving you that which you project. Life is our project. We are our life's creators. God has created man, but as freedom. So there is an essential freedom inside; now it is up to you to choose what you would like to happen to you in life and then you will see that it starts happening. One thing is linked with another, one thing leads to another, and slowly you have taken a certain route; then all other alternatives are dropped. When a child is born, all the alternatives are open; he is utterly free.

He can be a musician, poet, wrestler, a politician, he can be anything an Adolf Hitler, a Gautama Buddha; anything is possible But sooner or later choices start coming and he starts moving in a certain direction. Then that direction remains his world. So always remember: whatsoever has happened to you, you have been the cause of it. Sometimes it hurts that you are the cause of all the misery that has happened to you; you feel sad But there is no need to feel sad, because through it, you come to an understanding, and then things need not happen the same way again to you.

And the second thing to remember is: For every hurt or happiness always feel thankful, because sometimes pain is needed for growth and pleasure is not needed. So whatsoever happens, make it an opportunity to grow. Use that opportunity as a springboard for something higher. A friend dies, there is pain, there is anguish and misery, but use that opportunity. Meditate on death. Your friend's death has reminded you of a very significant phenomenon that death is there. Don't arrange your life without taking note of death.

Maybe existence has given you a message to get ready: the friend is gone, you will be gone one day, so prepare for death! Life is a small affair; a seventy-year affair in which one-third will be gone in sleep, another one-third will be gone in earning bread and butter, another one-third in other stupidities. Nothing much is left! It is not a big thing, it is a very small phenomenon; compared to death it is nothing Death is eternity. 