The U.N. General Assembly on Dec 11,2014 approved by consensus a resolution establishing June 21 as 'International Day of Yoga'. The date chosen, June 21, one of the two solstices, has special significance in many parts of the world and hence the suggestion made by India’s Prime Minister to dedicate that day to yoga.
 
Meaning of yoga
 If you were to ask a regular person 'what is the meaning of yoga?’ -- the answer most probably would be 'physical stretches and breathing exercises' as in Hatha Yoga, or 'meditation-- a technique to calm and relax the mind.'  Others may say yoga means connection, that is, whatever the mind is connected to, then the mind is in yoga with that.
 
 A serious practitioner would describe the philosophy of yoga and spiritual disciplines of a yogic lifestyle.  He would value the practice of yoga as a way to acquire subtle powers and perceptions to understand and experience the purpose and meaning of life.  And those who are experimenting with the spiritual trajectory of collective consciousness may describe yoga as a unifying spiritual principle and claim that it is the 'culture' for peace and non-violence.
 
Raja yoga
As a practitioner of Raja Yoga as taught by the Brahma Kumaris, I would describe it as a way of life. It is a pilgrimage of remembrance.  The Soul is the traveller and life is the journey.  It is a return journey to Self-sovereignty and the catalyst is remembrance -- remembering who I am, to whom I belong, and the part I play on the world stage, interacting with other actors.  It is the paradox of Self-realisation within the context of the collective.  The goal is liberation and liberation-in-life of souls through a process of purification and perfection.
 
The method is yoga with the Supreme Soul, God.  Yoga is connecting with the Source through which spiritual might is received and the will power in human souls is activated by an enlightened conscience.  "Shakti" is spiritual might and it comes directly from God and is the only energy that can purify souls and remove the toxic waste of anger, attachment, ego, greed, and lust.  The teachings of Raja Yoga connect the soul to its original, authentic Self, to the treasures within -- wisdom, virtues, and spiritual powers.  It provides the basis of life-changing experiences through understanding the non-negotiable laws of life, making meaning out of intention and purpose, discerning truth from facts and figures, and seeing clearly the distinction between maps and territory.
 
Our deepest quest
A human being's deepest quest is to experience truth for himself.  When he is able to explore and feel within the core of his heart the subliminal impact of universal truths, only then will doubts be removed, darkness recede, and righteousness be restored. 
 
Perhaps putting yoga on the global agenda as an international day is a way to provide an elevated platform for stakeholders to see the world with a new awareness; then speak about issues and perceive the landscape of possibilities with a deep commitment to peace, and act with extraordinary generosity towards the well-being of all peoples of the globe.