Hanuman helps us transcend attachment and its six arms — desire, anger, greed, jealousy, arrogance and delusion, writes POOJA KHOSLA on the eve of Hanuman Jayanti
 
Hanuman is affectionately referred to as the ‘Lord of the Apes’. His other popular names include Anjaneya and Maruti, each of which holds a specific meaning: Anjaneya, because he is the son of Anjana Devi. In Sanskrit, the word anjana means affection and love. Therefore, Anjaneya is one who creates affection or pure happiness. He is called Maruti because he is the son of Vayu, the wind god; marut means air in Sanskrit. Hanu means jnana or knowledge; hence, Hanuman is the one who has perfect divine knowledge. Hanu also means one who destroys. Hanuman is an aspect of Shiva, who is known as the Annihilator. So, Hanuman is the destroyer or remover of sins and problems. There is no difference between them; remembering Hanuman is the same as remembering Shiva.
 
Disturbed by his pranks, some sages placed a mild curse on him due to which he became unable to remember his own abilities unless reminded by another person; Once reminded of his strengths, he will use it to protect us. Hanuman is life. He merges mind and intellect.
 
Forty Verses
 
Hanuman is the future Brahma. We will keep getting reborn. We pray to end our rebirths and also for peace of mind by reciting the Hanuman Chalisa, a devotional hymn of 40 verses believed to have been penned by the 16th century poet Tulsidas, who also wrote the Ramcharitmanas; It is said that Hanuman himself helped Tulsidas write the shlokas.
 
The vedas and the upanishads are contained in the Chalisa. Anyone who chants his name is said to be blessed with keen intellect, fame and strength. Chanting of the Chalisa produces powerful positive vibrations that help us overcome difficulties. It will take us across the ocean of maya or illusion. Both Rama and Sita prayed to Hanuman to remove their sorrows. Krishna, the Pandava brothers and Draupadi have all worshipped Hanuman and were released from their miseries. It is believed that all the 33 crore deities in the Hindu pantheon worship Hanuman. Even the sun and the moon worship him.
 
Hanuman’s love rules the world and sustains it. When we are filled with worldly possessive love that leads to our destruction, Hanuman helps us transcend attachment and its six arms: desire, anger, greed, jealousy, arrogance and delusion. To get closer to Hanuman, we must practice detachment.
 
The faithful believe that Hanuman will free us from all worldly bondages, and false accusations, help us find a cure for chronic or undiagnosed diseases, remove all hurdles in business, education, work and relationships.
 
It is believed that Hanuman is ever engaged in the practice of Nada Yoga or union by divine music, and the ceaseless chanting of Rama’s name. He is known as the greatest devotee of Rama. Whenever and wherever the glory of Rama is sung with faith and devotion, Hanuman is said to dwell there to bless the devotees.
 
Throughout the world, Hanuman gives darshan to millions of people, through small statues in temples as well as towering sculptures. Through his role as described in the Ramayana, Hanuman reminds us to be fearless and selfless in our devotion and service to God and mankind.
 
Guinness Record
 
Recently, about 1.30 lakh devotees of Hanuman set a Guinness world record by chanting Hanuman Chalisa nonstop for four hours. The event was organised by Ganapathi Sachchidananda Swami, the pontiff of the Mysuru-based Avadhoota Datta Peetham. According to the seer, the object of the event, organised in Tenali in Andhra Pradesh, was to promote universal peace and wellbeing. The 72-year-old seer said that when he was a three-year-old boy, he was inspired by his mother to spread the message of the Hanuman Chalisa.
 
Citing the reason for choosing to chant the Chalisa, the pontiff says that the sound vibrations generated by the shloka will help promote universal brotherhood. He said there is scientific evidence to show that chanting generates sound waves that get converted into electro-magnetic waves, which have a positive impact on all beings. He says the vibrations generated from such mass chantings reverberate for years and help create a healthy society.  “Such events help spread the principles of tolerance, ahimsa, inclusiveness, nishkama karma, stithipragna, meditation, yoga, morals, ethics, harmony and many such virtues,” the seer said.
 
Let us pray that Hanuman blesses mankind with peace and harmony.