We have appropriated Mahavira’s teachings, put him in a box and branded him as a Jain,” says Upadhyaya Nayansagar, a digambar Jain monk. He is discussing Mahavira’s legacy, his teachings and his relevance in the 21st century with The Speaking Tree. “Jains have failed to take Mahavira’s teachings to the world, it’s our incapability really; we have restricted him to a small community. Imagine how much the world would have benefitted from his teachings, especially that of ahimsa,” he adds.
 
Nayansagar was 14 years old, a 10th standard student, when he decided to leave everything and become a monk, inspired by the role of a tirthankara that he essayed in a drama. He played Bhagvan Neminath, 22nd tirthankara. When Neminath was on his way to his wedding, he saw animals tied to a pole. When he enquired why the animals were tied up, he was told that these were to be slaughtered, their meat cooked and served to guests who were to attend his wedding. Neminath left the wedding venue, resolved to remain a bachelor and went to Girnar Parbat where he eventually attained moksha. Nayansagar was inspired by this story and has spent the last 27 years as a monk. He is now 42.
 
 “Ahimsa is a way of life and it is very easy to understand. We should not think thoughts that are harmful to others,” he says. When our minds become impure and polluted, that is the beginning of himsa or violence. Resorting to use of guns, tanks and bombs is only an external manifestation of violence that is present in our minds. The world can experience peace only through the principle of ahimsa. “The saying, ‘Mann ko jite, jeet hai, mann ko hare, haar’ means when we are able to control our mind we win and when lose control of our mind, we lose. The one who overcomes the ego-self becomes a jina or victor,” explains Nayansagarji. One way of keeping the mind pure is to focus on rituals like puja or directly on God, he suggests.
 
The Jain religion has five major principles — ahimsa, nonviolence; satya, truth; asteya, nonstealing; brahmacharya, chastity and aparigraha, nonpossession. According to Nayansagarji, the major problems of religious intolerance, terrorism, and attacks on minorities like the Christian community that is gaining currency now can be resolved if the majority starts practising these principles. “It’s important for us to project Mahavira as an international philosopher rather than restricting him to Jain religion only,” says Nayansagarji.
 
Jain religion treats everybody as equals; we have no right to force other people to follow our religion. They should be allowed to practise their religion in peace. When we force our religion on others, it is dictatorship and dictatorship leads to violence. Jains believe in Sarve bhavntu sukhina — happiness for everybody.
 
“In Jainism, there are 24 tirthankaras in every kaal or period. Mahavira never said that only Jains should progress in the world; he gave the same respect to plants and trees as he gave to human beings. He promoted the concept of anekantavada that teaches us to be tolerant,”says Acharya Gyansagar. Mahavira was among the first world teachers to declare that the same truth can be viewed differently by diverse people. “Jain dharma encourages everybody to be good human beings. Refraining from physical violence is not ahimsa; we have to also restrain ourselves from hurting others through our speech and that’s the real meaning of ahimsa. The person who practises ahimsa is not a coward; it requires great courage to live a life of ahimsa,” he adds, explaining that farming is not considered a violent profession because a farmer produces food that can be consumed by others. Also, if someone dies during medical treatment, you cannot brand the medical profession as violent — because the doctor’s intention is to save the patient and not kill him.
 
Dharma And Education
 
Mahavira respected all forms of life, because our eco system depends on them. That is why Jains monks carry with them the picchika, a broom made of peacock feathers, to sweep the floor before they sit on it. Gyansagarji says that the principle of ahimsa should be taught in schools. Real education should instil tolerance and acceptance of diversity in society. He suspects that modern education is misusing the brain and turning it into a money-spinning machine. “Not just the right education, but following dharma is also very important for creating a peaceful and tolerant society,” he says. Dharma helps us overcome ego.
 
According to the acharya, we have come in this world to do janseva, atman seva, and to achieve the state of Ishwara. He says, in Jainism all actions are performed so that we can become Ishwara; we have come not for bhoga or to consume luxuries but for seva, atma kalyan and to eventually attain moksha. He suggests that since Mahavira’s main teaching was ahimsa, slaughter houses should be closed down on Mahavir Jayanti and people should be educated about the scientific benefits of vegetarianism.
 
Merely giving speeches in the name of Mahavira will not help in furthering his teachings. “First, the Jains have to adopt Mahavira’s teachings in their own life and become a shining example for others to follow. We should be honest in our dealings and have credibility in all our transactions with others so that they can trust us, only then will they follow us,” he says, with a smile. “Following dharma or right action teaches us to be in gratitude; it brings peace and bliss to our minds. Faith helps us in reducing desires which is beneficial for our ecosystem. We must believe in unity in diversity for a peaceful and tolerant society.”