As the vehicle cruised through the eight hairpin bends on its way up the Wayanad Hills, it kept raining intermittently. The rain stopped only after the ninth and last bend. I rolled down the window of the car to feel the breeze and was pleasantly surprised by a gush of heady fragrance. The scent seemed to follow me all the way to my destination, Vythiri. “That’s the fragrance of the coffee bloom. In another two weeks, the coffee shrubs would be studded with cherries with seeds that we call coffee beans,” said Malavika Menon, my friend from Wayanad. As I inhaled deeply, she added: “Did you know that the Jain community introduced Wayanad to coffee?”
 
For starters, I found it difficult to associate Kerala with the Jain community. For me, Kerala was about spices, coffee and the backwaters. “Historical evidence suggests that due to frequent attacks on the community by the kings who succeeded the Hoyasalas in Karnataka in the 13th century, many Jain families migrated to Wayanad and other parts of Kerala,” she said. The Kannada-speaking people here are all Jains, of the Digambara sect; they are called Gowadas. No wonder there are several Jain temples across Wayanad.
 
We were now driving through Panamaram Village. As I sat absorbing these facts, our car stopped in front of some ruins, a portion of which was jutting out onto the main road. “These are the remains of one of the oldest Jain temples in Wayanad. This shrine is believed to have been built in the period between 12th to 14th centuries,” she continued as we stepped out of the car to explore the ruins.
 
Surrounded by coffee shrubs, the ruins seemed to testify what Malavika had just told me about the Jains and coffee. Though open and unguarded, the structure and its sculptural art are quite well-preserved.
 
I balanced myself precariously on the pile of granite stones to take in the excellent craftsmanship. The layout and architectural style of the Temple seemed to indicate its importance and influence in a bygone era when Jainism was at its peak here. There were no idols of Tirthankaras in the sanctum. Whether they were moved to a protected place or were stolen is anyone’s guess.
 
Tipu’s Ammunition Depot
 
The overcast sky and the misty tea and coffee gardens only heightened the mystery that surrounds the moss-covered walls and pillars engraved with beautiful forms of deities, the dilapidated roofing and the trenches made by treasure hunters. Besides Jain iconography, images of Hindu gods like Ganesha, Krishna and Shiva, some erotic images have been etched on the pillars. According to historian William Logan’s Malabar Manual, the architecture style of several Hindu temples in Kerala was influenced by Jain temples. In fact, some of them were originally Jain temples.
 
Apart from this temple, there are other significant Jain remnants to be found across Wayanad. Our next stop was at Sultan Bathery, the town with a 13th century Jain temple that once stored the ammunition of Tipu Sultan’s marching armies. Here too, there was no idol inside the sanctum. The temple was empty, but for a lone ASI official who also doubled up as watchman. The state archaeology department repaired the temple in 1996. The ASI official tells us that the idol which was originally in the sanctum here has been shifted to a newer Jain temple at Kalpetta. However, every year, on the occasion of Mahavir Jayanti, the idol is brought to this temple and ritual prayers are offered. The temple is entirely made of stones. On the pillars and on the walls of the temple are engraved the images of tirthankaras, a swan in a meditative pose, nagapasham — an entwined snake — and the seven levels to achieve Nirvana.
 
Malavika then takes me to another Jain temple, the 300 year-old Chandranatha Swamy Temple (originally a thatched structure) in Puthanangadi. In 1920, Jain families in the neighbourhood pooled in money to build a concrete temple. There is a huge statue of the eighth Jain tirthankara Chandraprabha, besides a 27 ft tall Manasthamba. According to Jain tradition, the manasthamba gently reminds the faithful to shed their pride while entering the samavasarana or preaching hall.
 
“In olden days, the area surrounding the temple was populated by Jain families who traded in gems and pearls. Over time, trade declined and many people left for greener pastures. In 1950, a trust was formed to develop this temple. Later, a new idol was installed and the Panchakalyan Pratishta ritual was conducted in 1958,” says Shyam Sundar Jain, the temple priest who lives in the adjoining complex.
 
Friendly Farming Practices
 
“The temple stands in a private property. Initially we had 300 acres of land. When the Kerala government took over the land, we were promised compensation, which never came,” he says and adds that his family is finding it difficult to maintain the temple complex. “Unlike in other states, Jainism is not considered as a separate religion by the Kerala government; for the state, we are Hindus,” says his brother Parsvanathan, who is also a priest here.
 
The Wayanad Jains are mainly farmers and businessmen. “Since digging and ploughing are not encouraged among the Jain community, we have introduced new eco-farming practices that cause minimum damage to the land,” said Shyam Sundar.
 
Though time seems to have stopped for some Jain shrines in Wayanad’s coffee plantations, the community has moved on to rewrite their contributions to modern-day society and culture. These Jain temples are seen as symbols of resilience, strength and nonviolence as preached by Jain tirthankaras. The principle of anekanta — that there is no single Absolute Truth but many truths — has generated respect for other faiths and world-views among the Jains. Most importantly, it has helped the community blend into Kerala’s cultural fabric.