Why get exercised about conversions or demand ghar wapsi when we’re not believers but seekers of truth, asks SADHGURU JAGGI VASUDEV, founder, Isha Foundation, in a conversation with  NARAYANI GANESH and REENA SINGH in Delhi. He dismisses the recent church attacks as acts of vandalism
 
The media is full of reports of vandalisation of churches, forced religious conversions, and ghar wapsi. Can faith leaders like you help diffuse the situation?
 
  This religious intolerance thing has been orchestrated by somebody. I am saying the vandals are not burning down churches. They are throwing two stones and running away. It is a similar pattern wherever it happens.
 
But a septuagenarian nun was raped in a convent in Kolkata!
 
That has nothing to do with religion. A woman gets raped. She could be a nun or anyone else; she is a woman. A man comes to steal and run, and on the way, he thinks he can also do this and run away. The audacity is that in that part of the country, the law enforcement is in that kind of (poor) state. Theft and robbery happens. Why do you connect everything to religion? I am not saying it is not there at all. It is there. But these are very strange kind of happenings which the local police can control. You don’t need national attention for that nor does the prime minister have to issue a statement on these incidents which should be treated as local law and order matters. Vandalism is all over. If my car is parked somewhere, and someone scratches it and runs away, should you say, ‘Hindu guru’s car scratched in a case of religious intolerance’? This happens to everybody. But the way it is happening; getting distorted and highlighted, it is obvious someone wants to hurt the government.
 
These attacks are being seen as targeting minorities. What can be done to counter this?
 
I feel that raising it to national-international pitch like it is being done is not right — now people are saying that India is a religiously intolerant country whereas it is all about law and order.
 
Every country has its share of nutcases and we too have ours. Don’t put them centrestage. Let them remain fringe elements. They are not even fringe parties; why should we give them so much importance?
 
Then why this need now to establish one’s Hindu identity? Who is a Hindu?
 
n ‘Hindu’ is a geographical identity. It has nothing to do with anybody’s religious beliefs. But in today’s context, it is trying to be pushed in that direction. If a grasshopper is born in this land, it is a Hindu. Not by religious identity but by geographical identity just as a grasshopper born in Africa is African.
 
If so, why are we branded as Sikh, Hindu or Christian, for example?
 
Where is the separation? You are imagining it. I am saying you are born as a human being. Someone makes you a Christian, Muslim, Hindu or whatever by what you believe. In this culture and yogic process, you are not a believer; you are a seeker of truth. Then where is the conflict? When you believe something, you cannot seek. Hindus (referred to as the majority community) are now feeling insecure because the demographics in the region is changing dramatically. Nobody wants to talk about it, because if I talk about it, I will become unpopular. But go to Nagaland, Meghalaya, wherever, the populations have become 98 per cent changed. Go to Lakshadweep, they are 100 per cent changed. Go to Kerala, Southern TN, they are 50 per cent changed. When did all this happen? It happened in a matter of 25 years. When it is happening rapidly, you become insecure. You don’t know what will happen to you tomorrow.
 
You mean people are converting to Christianity?
 
Yes. I am saying for everybody: Don’t try to change the demographics, whether you are in a majority or minority community. Let us just live with who we are. Let’s see how to take this country forward. All the immigrants put together in UK are not more than 10 per cent. That’s their policy. They have kept it under control. In the US do you think you can get elected to any (political) office if you don’t belong to a particular religion? You have to be Christian. Look at Bobby Jindal. And see how Obama keeps on repeating, ‘I am Christian’ — because Republicans say he is Muslim. Our country isn’t like that. We can have a Sikh PM, a Muslim president; we have no issues with a Muslim as captain of the cricket team or as leading movie stars. It is perfectly fine with us. But if the demographics are being actively changed, there will be insecurity. One must understand this.
 
So, you’re saying that there is also no need for ghar wapsi?
 
I’m saying there’s no need to change demographics of any kind. Let’s keep it as it is, but it is changing radically in many areas. I personally don’t identify myself with any religion. We are not concerned with religion or god in this country. It is only about your liberation; that is the only goal. Now, insecurity has come into the so-called majority community because they have been powerless with 800-1,000 years of foreign rule; they’ve become insecure, incompetent; they don’t know how to take charge of their lives and their nation and they are doing all kinds of things. So, bring some semblance of security for everybody. You say, for the first time, minorities are insecure. I am saying the majority (of the majority community) is feeling terribly insecure.
 
But India gained independence more than 60 years ago….
 
Sixty years won’t change the culture of a nation. What’s happened in Kashmir has not been forgotten. It has gotten into everybody and there is fear in their hearts. Twenty-five years you have been burnt out of your homes and nobody talks about you anymore. You live as refugees in Delhi and all over the world and who is bothered about getting you back home? Will any government get the displaced Kashmiri (Hindu) back? Will you get them back? Nobody has the courage. So, having all these examples in the country, please don’t change the demographics. Just leave it. Let everybody practise whatever they want in their homes. Why do you try to change the country from the way it is? Let us, instead, take the country forward for everyone.