Whatever we do not know, in order to conceal our limitations or hide our imperfections, we either say that it is non-existent, or we will say it is an abstract. In the universe, whatever comes within the scope of our senses or within the periphery of our perception, we say, “It is,” and whatever is beyond the arena of the senses or jurisdiction of perception, we cannot say anything. Hence, our world functions within the limitations of our senses and perceptions.
 
We know in the realm of cosmic introvert or extrovert, in the first (extrovert) phase,“subtle” is transmuted into “crude”, and in the returning phase of introvert, “crude” is metamorphosed into “subtle”. In this progress, a semicircular approach, there may be subtler objects in the scope of matter – many objects subtler than electrons or protons, [neutrons] or positrons – but we find no alternative but to say that they are either electron or proton or positron or neutron. And similarly, in the psychic sphere there may be entities subtler than ectoplasm or its extra-psychic coverage, endoplasm.
 
There are entities which come within the realm of both physicality and psychic expressions which are smaller or subtler than atoms, electrons or protons, and in the psychic realm may be subtler than ectoplasm. For such objects or entities I use the term “microvitum”. Microvitum is the mysterious emanation of cosmic factor.
 
This microvitum, or in plural microvita, are not of protoplasmic order, and as such they have got little to do with carbon molecules or carbon atoms, which are treated as the initial points or initial stage of life in the universe. In pyhscial terms, the position of microvita is just between ectoplasm and electron, but they are neither ectoplasm nor electron. Due to our lack of knowing, we may say microvita is mysterious. Hence it is the mysterious emanation of cosmic factor. They are not of protoplasmic order, and hence the question of their protozoic or metazoic structure does not arise. It’s a mystery.
 
Microvita are not of the same density or subtlety. Some of them may come within the range of a highly developed microscope; others, by their actional expression,  faculty or vibrations, they may come within the scope of our perception. They are of subtler order. There may be still more subtle forms of microvita which may not come directly within the scope of our perception but may come within the scope of a special type of perception which is actually the reflection of conception within the range of perception in a limited sphere.
 
So microvita may be broadly divided into three categories – those coming within the scope of a microscope; those coming within the scope of perception as a result of their expression or actional vibration; and those coming within the scope of a special type of perception which is actually the reflection of conception within the periphery of perception.
 
Special perception may be felt or realised by persons having highly developed, spiritual minds. By dint of our spiritual or physico-psycho-spiritual sadhana, our minds will develop in all strata, and the power of conception will also develop. And we will know the secrets of these microvita.