Instead of the usual Easter card with floppy-eared bunnies or coloured eggs, which have more to do with the spring festival than with Christian observances of this holy time, my artist friend Thea sent me a picture of a poignant painting by 16th century Venetian artist Tiziano Vecellio, better known as Titian. The original, entitled 'Noli Me Tangere' hangs in London's National Gallery. 


The Latin words `Noli me tangere' are uttered, according to the Bible in John 20:17, by Jesus appearing to Mary Magdalene after his death and resurrection, and often translated as `Do not touch me'. The painting shows an overwhelmed Mary, on her knees beside her Teacher, one hand on the ground, the other reaching towards Jesus, who leans away slightly, avoiding her outstretched hand. 

Titian has managed to portray in the positioning of the body of Jesus a slight yet distinct moving away, as well as a compassionate reaching out, through a hand holding a staff that is extended over her head almost in a gesture of blessing. 

This is one of the most powerful moments in the teachings of the New Testament, and one that we so easily overlook. Try and picture this scene: Mary, a close follower ^ and in the early Christian Tradition a respected teacher of the faith, before later interpretations managed to distort and lower her status ^ has come to his tomb in deep mourning. She encounters the risen Christ, at first mistaking him for a gardener. He gently speaks her name, "Mary". 

"Rabboni", she responds, a loving form of the word that means Teacher, amazed and joyous, very naturally reaching out to him. Jesus immediately replies "Don't touch me!" Given the trauma and inconsolable grief Mary and the other disciples have recently been through, this sounds extremely rough, the harshness mitigated somewhat by the explanation that he cannot be touched as he is not yet 'risen'. 

But if we examine this further, we learn that the original Greek phrase in the Gospel of John is better translated as "Stop holding on to me" or "Cease clinging to me." And this puts a whole new meaning to the potent message, sadly one that many of us, individual Christians and churches too, tend to overlook. 

These words do not reject the feelings of love, respect and closeness of his followers, but caution about externalising or misrepresenting what he taught and what he lived and died for. Jesus has always pointed us towards a spiritual experience and a lived expression of his teachings, rather than mere worship of his person. 

This encounter with Jesus also teaches us that we cannot make a new start without letting go of what we think we hold most dear. And that includes our incomplete image or perception of the Teacher, which might involve prayer and ritual devoid of true understanding. We cling to the 'form', ignoring the 'essence'. Christ resurrected shows us the essence which lies beyond the form, which is not temporal body but eternal message. 


The moment beautifully illustrates that while the relationship with physical presence of Jesus may be over for his disciples, a newer, more powerful relationship needs to take hold ^ a relationship with his teachings and the courage to not just preach, but to actually live them. 


Being attached to the image of his person and dwelling on the physical loss could stop them ^ and us ^ from learning what is essential in his teachings to actively engage in a life of love, to care for the helpless and to work ceaselessly for peace and justice. 
