Our body is like a microcosm of our planet. When one part of this delicate natural machine is disturbed it sends ripples of stress through the whole 


One of the most important aspects of natural healing is to understand that healing depends on balance. If our external and internal lifestyles are balanced then, assuming we have the potential to get well, all the conditions necessary for healing are in place. To establish external balance we should develop a good, simple diet, drink plenty of water, get enough rest and sleep, exercise regularly within our capacity and have an enjoyable job or purpose in life or learn to enjoy it! Also it helps to live in a clean and healthy environment. We also need supportive and healthy relationships and should avoid substance abuse. 

We also have a subtle body made of energy. This subtle body is made up of life force energy; it runs through subtle pathways or meridians and centres of energy, also known as charkas. One of the main ways that a skilful healer helps the body to heal is simply by stimulating and unblocking the meridians so our natural energies flow freely bringing mental, emotional and eventually physical balance and well being. This is the main way that most natural healing therapies work 

Life Force Energy is the subtle foundation of all life, a sort of cosmic soup that supports, nourishes and sustains the cycle of birth, life and death of all forms of life. Physical matter is made up of differing frequencies of energy. Solid objects are made up of energy vibrating at a very low or slow frequency. Less solid objects like water, air and subtle life force energy are vibrating incredibly fast. Buddhism, Chinese Medicine, Vedic Science and other similar eastern philosophies understand the concept of energy much better than we do 

One aspect of the Eastern understanding of God is as Universal Life Force Energy, the source of all life. The life force in plants, trees, animals, humans, planets, stars and universes comes from this one source. Make contact with it and maintain or recreate good physical, mental and spiritual health. When we are in touch with this energy through prayer, meditation, taking a walk in the countryside or receiving healing we feel less separate and increasingly whole within ourselves and within the whole of creation. We experience a sense of unity, we become more aware of our place or role in the great scheme of things and at the same time we feel supported, safe, open and confident in our ability to be all that we are. We can say that these spiritual or personal experiences are the essence of healing 

The real meaning of natural healing is to restore a person to wholeness and having a healthy body is only a small part of this. A good natural healing treatment has the effect of restoring openness to our energy system so we can receive a well balanced flow of Universal Life Force Energy that is often cut off or restricted by illness. Being cut off from this life force is often the cause of much illness 

Happiness or fulfillment is just a state of mind it comes from within so it is impossible to find the lasting peace of mind we long for in the external world. In this way illness can be a real blessing in disguise because it can help to start us on that inner journey towards wholeness and ultimate healing 
