The Bhakti tradition has many practices for relating to Īśvara.
 
One can relate to Saguṇa Brahman mentally, or/and orally, or/and physically. Mentally one may meditate (dhyānam) upon Him, or chant (japa) a mantra. Orally also one may chant a mantra or chant a sahasranāma, a stotra, or may sing (bhajan/kirtan). Our Bhakti literature is full of stotras. A stotra may be:
 
i) a pañcakam (in five verses like Śiva-pañcakam, Kaupīna-pañcakam, Maniṣā-pañcakam),
 
ii) a ṣaṭkam (in six verse as in Nirvāṇa-ṣaṭkam),
iii) an aṣṭakam (in eight verses as in Liṅgaṣṭakam, Bhavānyaṣṭakam, Madhurāṣṭakam, Mahālakṣmyaṣṭakam),
 
iv) a daśaślokī (in ten verses as in Daśaśloki),
 
v) a chālisā (comprising 40 verses, Hanumān Chālisā, it is in Avadhi/Brjbhāṣā though)
 
vi) a śataślokī (comprising a hundred names),
 
vii) a sahasranāma (comprising a thousand names).
 
A stotra is not set to music unlike Bhajans and Kirtans. A sahasranāma is a kind of stotra that comprises a thousand names of the deity.
 
Sahasranāma literally means one thousand names, although it means unlimited names. Viṣṇu-sahasranāma means – a thousand names of Lord Viṣṇu.
 
A stotra has six characteristics:
 
i) salutation,
ii) benediction,
iii) statement of the doctrine,
iv) praise of the deity and His attributes,
v) description of His valour, form and deeds,
vi) and prayer.
 
While in elaborate stotras these features are clearly seen, in the sahasranāma these are brought out through selection of meaningful names that are strung together in a row.
 
In case of various names of Īśvara, three types of words are used to reveal the nature of Īśvara:
 
i) Words that reveal the essential nature of Īśvara, like satya, meaning - that which exists in all the three periods.
 
ii) Words that reveal Īśvara as the cause of the jagat. All that is here is Īśvara who is the father as well as the mother. Īśvara is ‘He’ from the standpoint of the maker, the efficient (intelligent) cause, and ‘She’ from the standpoint of the material cause, as the one who is manifest in the form of jagat. (This understanding is not there in other faiths, where the Lord is formless, but always “He”).
 
iii) Words that indicate the manifest form, as even the form of an avatāra. Keeping māyā under His control, Īśvara is manifest in special forms like Lord Rāma, Lord Kṛṣṇa…
 
All these three sets of names constitute a sahasranāma. The first two sets of names are common to every sahasranāma. Only the third set differs, in that it has special words for that specific form.
 
There are many sahasranāma that are available and are chanted in the tradition like - Ganeśa-sahasranāma, Śiva-sahasranāma, Dakṣiṇāmurti-sahasranāma, Subramaṇya-sahasranāma, Lakṣmī-sahasranāma, etc. However, the two most popular sahasranāmas are Viṣṇu-sahasranāma and Lalitā-sahasranāma. And when the term sahasranāma is used, it refers to Viṣṇu-sahasranāma which is the 149thadhyāya of the Anuśāsana-parva of the Mahābhārata. Tradition holds that it was composed by Sanaka (one of the four Kumāras, eternally living youths, mānasaputra of Brahmāji) and was given to Bhīṣma, who recited it to the Pāṇḍavas in the presence of Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa. At the end of the war, Yudhiṣṭhira approached Bhīṣma, who was lying on a bed of arrows waiting for death, and asked him ‘Who is the supreme Lord of all, who is the refuge of all, and by worshipping whom, one gains all that is good and the ultimate end?” I reply Bhīṣma gave the Viṣṇu-sahasranāma. This is how the thousand names of the Lord are presented in the Mahābhārata.
 
 
Meaning of the word Bhagavān:
 
‘bhaga asya asti iti bhagavān’ - one who possesses bhaga (wealth) is Bhagavān, the Lord. Just as one who has ‘dhanam’ is Dhanavān, one who has ‘balam’ is Balavān, one who has guṇa is Guṇavān; similarly one who has ‘bhaga’ is Bhagavān. Now, what is bhaga? The word bhaga is traditionally understood as the six-fold virtues in absolute measure
 
aiśvaryasya samagrasya vīryasya yaśasaḥ śrīyaḥ |
jñāna-vairāgyayoścaiva ṣaṇṇāṃ bhaga iti smṛtam || - Viṣṇu Purāṇa - VI.5.74
 
  i) samagra aiśvarya (absolute over-lordship)
 ii) samagra vīrya (absolute valour - the capacity to create, sustain and resolve),
iii) samagra yaśas (absolute glory),
iv) samagra śrīyam (absolute wealth),
 v) samagra jñānam (absolute knowledge)
vi) samagra vairāgya (absolute dispassion).
 
 
Thus one who possesses these six bhagas is Bhagavān.
 
Traditionally, all the following verses are chanted before the actual pārāyaṇa of Viṣṇu-sahasranāma, even though only 13 verses from the 6th to the 8th are found in the Mahābhārata. Similarly, there are 33 verses (34 together with vanamālī gadī śarṅgī) chanted after the pārāyaṇa of the stotra, totally constituting 171 verses (29+108+34) of which only 142 verses (13+107+22) are from the 149thadhyāya of the Anuśāsanaparva of the Mahābhārata.
 
***
 
Swāminī Ātmaprajñānanda Saraswatī is a Vedāntācāryā and Vyākaraṇācāryā. She teaches Vedānta and Pāṇini in Ārsha Vidyā Vikāś Kendra at Bhubaneswar. She is the author of three published books - Nomenclature of the Vedas, Ṛṣikās of the Ṛgveda, and Om: The Sound Symbol.